PART 1 The first scenario “Land Ho!” takes about 30 minutes to play.
In it you learn the first part of the basic rules for this expansion:
— G O —
Ame veRview using harbor settlements, ships, and settlers. Next, before you
play the second scenario “Pirate Lairs,” the second part of the
START HeRe
basic rules is explained. It teaches you about crews, transport,
and fighting pirates. These basic rules will be used for all
wHAT iS THiS exPAnSiOn All AbOuT?
subsequent scenarios in this expansion.
Catan: Explorers & Pirates™ consists of several different
In each subsequent scenario an additional mission, and a
scenarios. You and your opponents must use ships to explore
new set of rules, is added. The game opens up to you piece by
the unknown seas around Catan. When you discover new
piece, mission by mission, until you reach the final scenario
islands, you can build settlements there to gather their
“exPLorers & Pirates,” where all of the rules are used. We
resources. This theme of exploration and building is the
highly recommend that you play the scenarios in the order
emphasis of the first scenario and is the core of all of the
presented to learn the rules piece by piece, instead of all at
scenarios that follow.
once.
In subsequent scenarios, the Council of Catan sends you on
If, during the game, you have questions or need clarification,
missions. You will have to capture pirate lairs. You will discover
please refer to the index on the back of this overview to locate a
bountiful fish shoals where you can catch fish and deliver them
particular rule.
to the Council. You will also discover spice islands and set up
A Note Regarding Catan Edition Compatibility
trade deals with their inhabitants.
with this Expansion
To successfully explore these mysterious seas and complete
your missions for the Council, you will need a few things: the Mayfair Games first published the English language version of
well known settlements and roads from Catan
®
, as well as The Settlers of Catan® in 1996. Since that original edition, the
several all-new game pieces introduced in this expansion— game has grown in popularity and undergone several graphic
settlers, ships, harbors, crews, pirate ships, fish, and changes. The 4th edition, produced in 2007, introduced the
spices. board frame to hold the hexes together (1st - 3rd editions did
not have this frame). Explorers & Pirates requires the use of
Victory points (VPs) are awarded for the construction of
these frame pieces. If you have one of the earlier editions of
regular settlements and harbor settlements. Additional VPs are
The Settlers of Catan and wish to use it with this expansion, we
earned when you complete missions. The first player to reach
have a solution for you—simply order the Settlers of Catan
the required victory points wins.
Pre-2007 Adapter Kit (Part # CN3199) from your favorite
game store or at catanshop.com.
Europe is Autumn and We seek without plunder
11
G C Sorting the Die-Cut Components and Game Pieces
Ame OmPOnenTS
When detaching the die-cut game components, make sure
wOOden GAme PieCeS you start with sheet 1 and proceed as follows:
4 sets in 4 player colors, each containing: 1. From sheet 1: detach the 10 sorting tiles and put each into
its own storage bag. Note: player pieces are pre-bagged,
and the fish and spices must be placed into separate bags.
2. From sheet 2: detach the 4 new building costs cards and
• 16 harbor settlements (4 of each color)
put them into 4 separate bags along with the wooden pieces
of the same color. Place the corresponding “PLayer’s Pieces”
sorting tile into those bags.
• 36 crews (9 of each color)
3. From sheets 4-11: detach the 8 frame expansions (labeled
A1-A2, B1-B3,) and 8 sea hex pieces (labeled C1-C2, D1-D2,
• 12 ships (3 of each color) E, F1-F2 & G) and put them into the game box.
4. From sheets 11-13: detach all of the standard
terrain hexes and sea hexes with green and orange
icons on the back and put them into the bag
• 8 settlers (2 of each color)
containing the “standard Hexes + number tokens—
Green & oranGe” sorting tile.
5. From sheets 11-16: detach all of the number tokens with
• 12 markers (3 of each color)
green and orange icons on their backs and put them into
the bag containing the “standard Hexes + number tokens—
Green & oranGe” sorting tile.
• 4 pirate ships (1 of each color) 6. From sheets 3 & 14: detach the 2 blue VP cards, plus the
6 fish shoal hexes and put them into the bag containing the
Neutral Game Pieces:
“FisH For catan” sorting tile. Also put in the 6 wooden fish
• 6 fish hauls
haul pieces.
• 24 spice sacks
7. From sheets 3 & 15: detach the 2 green VP cards, plus
Tile Pieces (on 16 Die-Cut Sheets) the 6 spice hexes, and put them into the bag containing the
Gold Coins: “sPices For catan” sorting tile. Also put in the 24 wooden
spice sack pieces.
• 48 of value 1
8. From sheets 3, 4, 5 & 16: detach the 2 brown VP cards,
• 40 of value 3
plus the 6 pirate lair tokens, and the 6 pirate lair / gold field
Frame Expansion Pieces:
hexes, and place them into the bag containing the “Pirate
• 1 each: A1, A2, C1, C2, D1, D2, E, F1, F2, G
Lairs” sorting tile.
• 2 each: B1, B2, B3
9. From sheets 4-16: detach all of the value coins (value
Hexes & Other Game Components: 1 and 3) and put them into the bag with the “GoLd coins”
• 6 pirate lair / gold field hexes sorting tile.
• 6 fish shoal hexes
Required Components from Your Catan Base Game
• 6 spice hexes
You will need the following components from your
• 6 standard terrain hexes with green moon-icon backs
copy of Catan:
• 6 number tokens with green moon-icon backs
1. 14 terrain hexes: 2x fields, 2x hills, 3x mountains.
• 6 standard terrain hexes with orange sun-icon backs
• 6 number tokens with orange sun-icon backs 2. Number tokens: 3, 3, 4, 4, 5, 6, 6, 8, 8, 9, 10, 10, 11, 11, 12.
• 6 pirate lair tokens with numbered backs 3. All of the roads and settlements, but no cities.
• 3 mission cards
4. All of the resource cards, but no development cards.
• 3 victory point (VP) cards
5. And finally, the 2 dice and all 6 frame pieces.
• 4 new building costs cards
• 10 component sorting tiles
22
Note: If you plan to play several
1 2 3
of the Explorers & Pirates™
scenarios before you play
Catan again, we suggest that
®
you put all of the parts from
steps 1-2 (above) into the bag
containing the “Pieces from Base
catan” sorting tile, all of the
wooden components into bags
of their respective colors, and
the rest into the box. This will
speed up your setup time.
4 5 6 7
8 9 10 11 12
13 14 15 16
33
index
This in an index of the rule book. Use it to Missions Settler
quickly find relevant information. • Fish For Catan Mission 13 • Building a Settler 5
• General Rules for Missions 8 • Building a Settlement with the Aid of a Settler Ship 5
Crews
• Pirate Lairs Mission 9 • Movement Phase: Loading a Settler 5
• Building and Loading a Crew 6
• sPiCes For Catan Mission 15 Ships
• Moving Crews 6
Pirate Lairs • Building Ships 3
Discovering
• After the Capture 11 • Discovering with Ships 4
• Discovering Pirate Lairs 10
• Capturing Pirate Lairs 10 • Loading and Unloading Ships 4
• Discovering a Spice Hex 15
• Determining Heroes 11 • Moving Ships 4
• Discovering a Fish Shoal Hex 13
• Discovering Pirate Lairs 10
Spices
• Discovery Ends a Ship’s Movement 4
• Gold Production at Gold Field Hexes 11
• Reward for a Discovery (in General) 4 • Additional Rules 15
Pirate Ship • Delivering a Spice Sack 15
Fish
• A “7” Is Rolled: Moving the Pirate Ship 7 • Discovering a Spice Hex 15
• Catching a Fish Haul 13
• Chasing Away a Pirate Ship 8 • Placing a Crew and Loading a Spice Sack 15
• Delivering a Fish Haul 13
• Moving the Pirate Ship: Stealing a Resource 7
Spice Hexes, Advantages
• Discovering a Fish Shoal Hex 13
• Paying Tribute to the Pirate 7
• Rolling the Die to Place a Fish Haul 13 • Fast Gold 15
• Pirates Also Catch Fish 13
• Pirate Bonus 15
Gold • Placing a Pirate Ship 7
• Swift Voyage 15
• Fast Gold (Advantage) 15 Scenarios
Turn
• Gold Compensation (Production Phase) 3
• Scenario 1: Land ho! Introductory Scenario 2
• Gold Production at Gold Field Hexes 11 • 3:1 Trade 3
• Scenario 2: Pirate Lairs 9
• Paying Gold to Buy Resources 3 • Production Phase 3
• Scenario 3: Fish For Catan 12
• Reward for a Discovery 4 • Trade and Build Phase 3
• Scenario 4: sPiCes For Catan 14
Harbor Settlements 5 • Scenario 5: exPLorers & Pirates 16 Transshipping Game Pieces
• Transshipping Pieces Between 2 Ships 6
Set-up Phase
• Transshipping Pieces Between Your Ship
• Free Set-up 10
and Your Harbor Settlement 6
CRediTS
German Edition Art: Michael Menzel
Author: Klaus Teuber Production: Ron Magin
Developement: TM-Spiele and Sebastian Rapp Graphic Design: Pete Fenlon, Michaela Kienle, and Ron Magin
Illustration: Michael Menzel Translation: Gavin Allister
Graphic Design & Production: Michaela Kienle/Fine Tuning Wooden Piece Design: Klaus Teuber
Component Design: Andreas Klober Special Thanks: Robert T. Carty, Jr., Coleman Charlton,
Morgan Dontanville, Chris Funk, Alex Colón Hernández,
The author and publisher wish to thank the following people
Sarah Kemble Knight (LSKC 1-617), Stephanie Newman,
for playtesting: Stefan Wiewiora, Stefanie Dohmen, Benjamin
Donna Prior, and Kelli Schmitz.
Teuber, Guido Teuber, Claudia Teuber, Gero Zahn, Arnd Beenen,
Peter Gustav Bartschat, Dr. Reiner Düren, and Christoph Rother. In Memory of: Carol Finch and Phyllis Opolko
English Edition You have purchased a game of the highest quality.
Copyright © 2020 Catan GmbH and Catan Studio. Catan, However, if you find any components missing
Catan–Cities & Knights, The Settlers of Catan, the “Catan Sun” or damaged, please visit:
logo, the “Glowing Yellow Sun” and “Catan Board” marks, and www.catanstudio.com/parts
all marks herein are trademarks of Catan GmbH and are used For all other inquiries, contact us at:
under license by Catan Studio. Published by Catan Studio,
info@catanstudio.com
1995 W. County Rd. B2, Roseville, MN 55113.
Phone +1.651.639.1905.
Studio
™
catanstudio.com catan.com
44
WAIT! If you haven’t read the game overview yet, please start there.
This rule book is broken up into sections. Each section contains a new scenario. Each scenario introduces a new
set of rules you can add to the game. The scenarios are “Land Ho!,” “Pirate Lairs,” “FisH For Catan,” “sPiCes For Catan,”
and finally, the epic “exPLorers & Pirates.” Please read the overview before playing these scenarios. Prepare yourself for
adventure and excitement!
SCENARIO 1: LAND HO! GAmE BOARD SEt-up
Before play, you must build the game board. First, you
REquIRED GAmE COmpONENtS
assemble the frame. Next, you create the starting island and the
You need the following game components from a copy of unexplored areas.
Catan (hereafter referred to as “base Catan”):
® Assembling the Game Board Frame
• All game components from the bag containing the “PIECES
Use the frame pieces from the base Catan game plus the
FROM BASE CATAN” sorting tile (see page 2 & 3 of the
frame pieces from Explorers & Pirates. Use example 1 as your
game overview)
assembly guide. The unmarked frame pieces in the example are
• 6 frame pieces
from the base Catan game. Place the base Catan frame pieces
• All roads and settlements
face down.
• 2 dice
The completed frame divides the game board into 3 areas.
• All resource cards (but no development cards)
The area to the west (with the pasture hex) is the starting
You need the following game components from this Explorers
island. Across the seas to the east are two unexplored areas.
& Pirates™ expansion:
These areas are separated by sea hexes formed by the F1 and F2
• Frame pieces: 1x A1, A2, C1, C2, D1, F1, F2, and 2x B3
frame pieces. They are known as the northern unexplored area
• The game pieces listed under “Preparation” on page 2
and the southern unexplored area.
• The terrain hexes from the “Standard HexeS + number
tokenS Green and oranGe” bag
• All of the gold coins
Example 1:
BB33
Northern
Unexplored Area
CC11
AA11
Starting
DD11 FF11 FF22
Island
Note: The large white frame
numbers on the setup examples
AA22
are not actually depicted on
the fronts of the frame pieces
CC22 Southern
themselves. They were added to 1
these examples to aid in your
f r
o
m
of
6
f
Unexplored Area
r
s
h
e
a
t
v
u
e
p .
s m
Th
a
e
l l
f r
b
o
l
n
u
t
e
s
n
of
u
t
m
he
b
f
e
r
r
a
s
m
. T
e
h
s
e
b as
e
C
a m
e
pi
backs have large white numbers. at a
n
e c es BB33
11
Creating the Starting Island pREpARAtION
Using the terrain hexes from the base Catan game, set up the Each player chooses a color and takes the following game
terrain hexes on the starting island exactly as shown in example pieces (see example 2 below):
2. Once the hexes are done, place the number tokens from the
• 5 settlements from the base Catan game
base Catan game (again, exactly as shown).
• 15 roads from the base Catan game
Building the Unexplored Areas • 4 harbor settlements from Explorers & Pirates
Before you place the hexes into the unexplored areas, sort • 3 ships from Explorers & Pirates
them into two separate stacks according to the icon on their
• 2 settlers from Explorers & Pirates
backs (green moons and orange suns). Shuffle each stack.
• 2 gold from Explorers & Pirates
Using example 2 as a guide, place the hexes’ icon side face
• 1 Explorers & Pirates building costs card
up. The green moons go into the northern area. The orange
Place your pieces in front of yourself. The remaining wooden
suns go into the southern area.
game pieces from Explorers & Pirates are not used in this
Separate and shuffle the green moon and orange sun number
introductory scenario.
tokens into two stacks. Place the stacks (icon side up) on the
Place the resource cards and dice from the base Catan game
frame near the matching region.
beside the game board to form a supply area.
Place the remaining gold coins in the supply area as well.
Each player chooses a color and takes:
Set-up Phase
In this scenario, the starting positions are predetermined.
Each player places 1 harbor settlement and 1 settler ship (a
5 settlements 15 roads 4 harbor ship with a settler in the hold), as well as 1 settlement and 1
settlements
road, at the locations shown in example 2. In a 3-player game,
don’t place the game pieces of the fourth, unused color.
1 building
3 ships 2 settlers 2 gold costs card
Example 2:
BB33 green moon
number tokens
1111 99
•••• ••••••••
33 88 CC11
•••• ••••••••••
AA11 44 1100
•••••• ••••••••
66 1122 88 DD11 FF11 FF22
•••••••••• •• ••••••••••
AA22
1100 44
•••••••• ••••••
1111 66 CC22
•••• ••••••••••
33 55
•••• •••• ••••
orange sun
BB33 number tokens
22
Starting resources: For each terrain hex adjacent their Movement Phase
settlement, each player takes the corresponding resource cards.
After you have concluded your trade and build phase, your
turn’s movement phase begins. During this phase:
Special Rules for Two Players
Each player chooses a color. The game pieces of the non- • You may move all your ships and perform actions with
chosen colors remain as obstacles on the starting island. them.
Remove only the settler ships of the non-chosen colors. • You are not allowed to trade or build during or after
the movement phase, except when you are “Building a
BASE GAmE RuLES
Settlement with the Aid of a Settler Ship” (see page 5).
The rules of the base Catan game also apply to all scenarios of Your turn ends after the movement phase.
this expansion, with the following exceptions:
SEA ROutES
• There are no development cards.
Ships are moved along sea routes. The edges of a sea hex
• There are no “Longest Road” and “Largest Army” special
are called sea routes. Sea routes separate sea hexes from each
victory point cards.
other and terrain hexes from sea hexes. The edges of frame
• Settlements cannot be upgraded to cities.
pieces bordering sea hexes or terrain hexes are also considered
• There is no robber piece to block resource hexes. as sea routes.
However, whenever a “7” is rolled, each player who has
SHIpS, HARBOR SEttLEmENtS, AND SEttLERS
more than 7 resources still loses half of their resources.
Starting with scenario 2, a pirate ship rule is added. It
performs many of the same functions as the described in
the classic robber rules.
sseettttlleerr
tHE pHASES Of A tuRN
sshhiipp
Production Phase
hhaarrbboorr
On your turn, you roll for production as usual; the result sseettttlleemmeenntt ttooggeetthheerr tthheeyy
applies to all players. aarree aa ““sseettttlleerr sshhiipp””
Gold Compensation
Ships
Whenever the production die roll results in you receiving no
Ships transport various game pieces from one place to
resources (except for the “7”), you receive 1 gold from the
another in the ship’s hold. A hold can only accommodate
supply instead.
1 large game piece (settler, fish haul) or 2 small game pieces
Trade and Build Phase
(crews, spice sacks).
After the production phase, you may trade and build in any Note: Fish hauls, crews, and spices will be described in later
order you wish. For example, you may first build, then trade, scenarios.
then build again, etc.
Building Ships
3:1 Trade A ship costs 1 lumber and 1 wool to build. When you build
In Explorers & Pirates, there are no harbors like the ones in a ship, place it on a sea route directly adjacent to one of your
base Catan. However, on your turn, you may trade resources harbor settlements, with the following conditions:
at a 3:1 rate, i.e., return 3 resources of the same type to the
• You cannot place a ship on a sea route adjacent to an
supply and take any 1 different resource of your choice from
undiscovered hex, because building the ship there would
the supply. You may also obtain 1 gold by paying 3 resources of
immediately result in the discovery of this hex (see
the same type.
Discovering with Ships on page 4).
Paying Gold to Buy Resources (2:1) • If you want to build a new ship when all your ships are
Twice during your turn, you may pay 2 gold for any already on the game board, you may remove any 1 of your
1 resource of your choice from the supply. You may also trade ships from the game board and build the new ship adjacent
gold with your opponents, just like resource cards. to one of your harbor settlements for the usual ship
building costs (1 lumber + 1 wool). Any pieces in the hold
of a ship you remove are lost (return them to your supply).
33
Moving Ships
• You may only move your ships during your movement Example 3: Discovering with Ships
phase.
• Each of your ships has 4 movement points. Moving a ship A
from a sea route to an adjacent sea route costs 1 movement
point.
• You may move a ship in any direction and also change
directions during its movement (e.g., you may move it
forward and then back to the same space if you wish).
• You must complete the movement of one ship before you
can move your next ship.
• During your turn, you may buy 2 additional movement
points for a ship by spending 1 wool card. This may be
done once (and only once) for each ship, each turn.
• Up to 2 ships may occupy a given sea route. These ships
B
may belong to the same or different players.
• You may move your ship past another ship (or past 2 side
by side ships). However, the movement of your ship may
not end on a sea route that is already occupied by 2 ships.
Loading and Unloading Ships
Each ship has a hold that accommodates 2 small game pieces
(crews or spice sacks) or one large game piece (settler, fish
haul). Please note that the crews, spice sacks, and fish hauls are
not used in this scenario. You may remove game pieces from
a ship and return them to the appropriate supply. This could
make sense if you want to make room for a more valuable game
C
piece.
Loading and unloading a ship costs no movement points.
You may continue to move a ship after loading or unloading,
provided that it still has movement points.
Discovering with Ships
To discover new land, you must move one of your ships
towards the unexplored areas of the board (example 3 A).
If, after moving a ship, one of its ends (bow or stern) points
toward the corner (intersection) of an undiscovered hex, you
must discover that hex (example 3 B).
Turn the hex over. If it is a terrain hex, take a number token D
from the stack whose color/icon matches the color/icon on the
back of the terrain hex and place it, number side face up, on
the hex (example 3 C).
Reward for a Discovery
If you discover a terrain hex, as a reward you get 1 resource
of the type produced by that hex (example 3 D). If you discover
any other type of hex (land or sea), you get 2 gold.
Discovery Ends a Ship’s Movement
After a discovery, you are not allowed to move the ship any
farther. Any remaining movement points are forfeited.
44
Harbor Settlements Movement Phase: Loading a Settler
If either end of your empty
Building a Harbor Settlement
ship points toward one of
For 2 grain and 2 ore,
your harbor settlements with
you can upgrade any one
a settler, you may load the
of your coastal settlements
settler onto the ship. You can
(it borders a sea hex or the
move your settler ship just
frame) to build a harbor
like a regular ship.
settlement. Pay the building
Important: Loading a
costs, return the settlement
settler onto a ship does not
to your supply, and replace
end the movement of the ship. For more rules on loading and
it with a harbor settlement.
unloading pieces, see Transshipping on page 6.
• A harbor settlement is worth 2 victory points.
Building a Settlement with the Aid of a Settler Ship
• A harbor settlement has a basin that can hold various game
If either end of one of your settler ships points toward
pieces. A basin can accommodate 1 large piece (settler,
the corner of a terrain hex (example 4 A), you may build a
fish haul) or 2 small pieces (crews, spice sacks).
settlement there (certain exceptions apply, which are explained
Important: When the number of an adjacent terrain hex is
in the context of the corresponding missions).
rolled, you receive only 1 resource for a harbor settlement.
They do not produce 2 resources like cities in base Catan. To build this new settlement, return both your ship and the
settler in its hold to your supply (example 4 B).
Settlements and Settlers
Place your new settlement on the intersection of the terrain
You can build settlements in 2 ways: either along a road, just
hex, at no additional cost (example 4 C).
like in base Catan; OR, by landing a settler ship (see below).
You observe the distance rule in both cases. Example 4:
Building a Settler
• Building a settler costs
the same resources as
building a settlement.
• When you build a A B C
settler, you must place
it either into the empty Important: When you build a settlement with the aid of
basin of one of your a settler ship, you must always observe the usual Catan
harbor settlements or distance rule (2 paths between settlements).
directly into the empty In each of the two unexplored areas on the game board, you
hold of one of your ships. This ship must be located on a can only build your first settlement by using a settler ship. Once
sea route adjacent to one of your harbor settlements. You you have established your first settlement in this area, you can
are never allowed to place a newly built settler on land. build roads and settlements there in a regular fashion. However,
• A ship with a settler in its hold is called a settler ship. you could also forgo road building and build further settlements
with the aid of settler ships.
• If the spaces in the harbor basin and in an adjacent ship’s
hold are occupied by another game piece, you can build Note: Roads may not be built on paths adjacent to
the settler only if you remove the other game piece from undiscovered hexes, and settlements may not be built on
the basin or hold and return it to your supply. intersections adjacent to undiscovered hexes. If you build
a road in such a way that one of its ends points toward an
• You are not allowed to move a settler overland. Your
undiscovered hex, you can’t discover that hex. You can only
settlers can only be transported by your ships.
discover hexes by means of ships.
ENDING tHE GAmE
You win “Land Ho!” if you reach 8 victory points (VP)
on your turn.
—Have fun exploring!
55
ADDItIONAL RuLES tRANSSHIppING GAmE pIECES
Once you have completed “Land Ho!” and are familiar with Transshipping Game Pieces Between Your Ship and Your
its rules, continue to scenario 2, “Pirate LairS.” The following Harbor Settlement
rules will be used in this scenario and every scenario thereafter. If either end of one of your loaded ships points to a loaded
Beginning with the second scenario, you can build crews. harbor settlement, you may swap the position of the game
You are also given your first mission by the Council of Catan. pieces in the ship and harbor settlement.
Additionally, whenever someone rolls a “7” pirate ships appear. Transshipping Game Pieces Between 2 Ships
Before you play the second scenario, familiarize yourself with You are not allowed to directly transship game pieces
the remaining basic rules… between 2 ships. However, indirect transshipping is possible if
either end of each of the two ships points to the same harbor
BuILDING
settlement and the harbor settlement is used for temporary
Crews storage (see example 5 below).
Crews represent
specialists that can ride on Example 5: Transshipping
your ships. You use them
A
to perform various tasks.
Depending on the mission,
crews can be merchants,
warriors, or both.
Building and Loading a Crew
• A crew costs 1 ore and 1 wool.
• To build a crew, pay the building costs and place the crew (A) One of the ends of a ship loaded with 2 crews
either on a free space in the basin of one of your harbor points to a harbor settlement. The harbor settlement
settlements or in the hold of one of your ships on a sea has a settler.
route adjacent to a harbor settlement.
B
• If you place the crew in the basin of a harbor settlement,
during the movement phase you can pick up the crew with
a ship, transport it to a destination, and unload it there.
• You can accommodate up to 2 crews in an empty basin or
empty ship.
• After loading or unloading a crew, you may continue to
move the ship, provided that you haven’t used all of its
(B) You have the crews and the settler swap places.
movement points yet.
C
Moving Crews
The transport of crews to their destinations can only take
place via your own ships. You are not allowed to move crews
overland along paths or roads.
(C) Then you load the 2 crews onto the right ship.
Hint: If your harbor settlements are strategically
well placed, you can use 2 ships and a harbor
settlement to transport game pieces to their
destination faster.
66
pIRAtE SHIpS Moving the Pirate Ship—Stealing a Resource
Pirate ships are a way for you to force your If you place your pirate ship on a sea hex, you may steal
opponents to pay gold to move their ships. 1 (random) resource card from the face-down hand of an
They also allow you to steal resource cards opponent who has a ship on a sea route of this hex. Settlements
(much like the robber rules in base Catan). or harbor settlements are not affected.
If, and only if, the opponent doesn’t have a resource card, you
Placing a Pirate Ship
may take a gold from him instead.
You may place a pirate ship on any sea
For example: In example 6 B (bottom of previous column),
hex—with 2 exceptions:
after Red placed her ship. She could steal a resource card either
• You may never place a pirate ship on
from Orange or Blue. Blue has no cards (but does have gold).
any sea hex adjacent to the starting
Orange has cards and gold. If Red steals from Blue, she can
island.
take a gold. If Red steals from Orange, she must take a card.
• You may never place a pirate ship
Paying Tribute to the Pirate
anywhere on the outside frame of the
board (pieces A1, A2, B1, B2, B3, or the If you move your ship onto, along, or off of, a sea route on a
6 frame pieces from base Catan). pirate hex (a hex that is occupied by an opponent’s pirate ship),
you must pay a tribute.
You each have 1 pirate ship in your supply. If you are the first
player to roll a “7,” place your pirate ship on one of the allowed • The tribute costs 1 gold, and you pay it to the supply.
sea hexes. Your pirate ship remains on the hex until someone • You must pay a separate tribute for each ship you move in
rolls another “7” or chases your pirate ship away (see page 8). this way (e.g., moving 1 ship costs you 1 gold, moving 2
ships costs you 2 gold, etc.).
A “7” Is Rolled—Placing and Moving the Pirate Ship
• Paying tribute for a ship allows that ship to move along,
• If anyone rolls a “7” and your hand contains more than
onto, or off of, any number of these routes during your
7 resource cards, you must discard half of your cards
current turn (you can even move off of and back onto).
rounded down (just like in base Catan).
• You may build a ship on a sea route adjacent to a hex
• If you rolled the “7” and your pirate ship is already on the
occupied by the pirate without paying tribute, because
game board, move it to another allowed sea hex.
building is not moving. However, if you then wish to move
• If you rolled the “7” and an opponent’s pirate ship is on the
this newly built ship, the tribute must be paid.
game board, return the pirate ship to that player’s supply
• You must pay this tribute, even if you already have spent 4
and place your own pirate ship on any allowed sea hex
gold to buy 2 resources during your trade & build phase.
(including the hex previously occupied by your opponent’s
pirate ship). That way, there is always only 1 pirate ship on
the game board (see example 6 below).
Example 7: Paying Tribute
Example 6: Moving a Pirate (Red rolls a “7”)
On each of their respective turns: Blue must pay 1 gold if
he moves this ship. Orange must pay a tribute of 2 gold
A B if she moves both ships (1 gold if she moves only 1 ship).
If White wishes to move onto the sea routes indicated,
(A) Blue returns his pirate ship to his supply. he must pay 1 gold. Red does not have to pay anything,
(B) Red places her pirate ship. because it is her pirate ship.
77
Chasing Away a Pirate Ship To chase away a pirate ship, you roll 1 die for each of your
battle-ready ships. If you roll a “6,” you successfully chase away
In order to attempt to chase away an opponent’s pirate ship,
the pirate ship; return it to its owner. Now place your own pirate
you must have at least one battle-ready ship. A ship is battle-
ship on any allowed sea hex and steal 1 resource card from
ready if the following 2 requirements are met:
the owner of an adjacent ship (see “Moving the Pirate Ship—
• It must not have moved on this turn.
Stealing a Resource” on page 7).
• One of its ends must be directly adjacent to one of the six
The following also applies:
intersections of the sea hex occupied by the pirate.
• A ship used to chase away a pirate ship may be moved in a
During your turn’s movement phase, each of your battle-ready
regular fashion afterwards.
ships may make 1 attempt to chase away an opponent’s pirate
• If you failed to chase away the pirate ship, you must pay
ship.
tribute to move your ship along the sea routes of the pirate
hex—or else you may not use these sea routes.
Example 8: Chasing Away a Pirate Ship
GENERAL RuLES fOR mISSIONS
(Red’s movement phase)
Except for “Land Ho!” (scenario 1), each scenario is played
with 1-3 missions. If a scenario includes multiple missions,
(A) Red has 3
unmoved ships. you may work on all of them at once. The game components
2 of them have ends for a mission are stored in their own bag and always include a
that point toward a mission card and a victory point (VP) card. Example 9 shows
corner of the pirate the mission card and the victory point card of the “Pirate LairS”
hex. She rolls two dice mission with some player markers on it.
(one time for each of
• At the beginning of the game, each player must place
these 2 ships).
A 1 marker on the starting space (S) of each mission card
used in the scenario.
• Whenever you make progress on a mission, move your
marker forward 1 space.
(B) One of the dice
• If the space you move your marker onto contains an
comes up a “6.”
opponent’s marker(s), place your marker on top.
Blue must return
his pirate ship to • The number of VP symbols depicted next to each marker
his supply. indicates the number of mission VPs the owner has
accumulated. In example 9, Red and White have 1 victory
point each. Orange and Blue have 2 VPs each.
B • If your marker has moved the farthest from the “S” space,
you receive the mission’s VP card. It is worth 1 VP.
• If players’ markers are on top of each other on the most
advanced space, the marker on the bottom receives the
special VP card, as it was the first to arrive there.
(C) Red places her Note: In example 9 (below), Blue gets the VP card.
pirate ship beside
Blue’s ship. Red
may steal 1 random Example 9: Mission and Victory Point Cards
resource card from
Blue. Blue now has Pirate Lairs
1 battle-ready ship.
C Greatest
Pirate Scourge
The Mission: conquer the most pirate lairs.
88
pIRAtE LAIRS Assembling the Unexplored Areas
Open the “Pirate LairS” mission bag.
In this scenario, you are given the following mission:
Shuffle the 3 green moon-backed
First, locate the gold fields in the unexplored areas. They are
gold field hexes together with the
all occupied by pirate lairs. Second, build crews and send them
green moon-backed standard hexes
to defeat the pirate lairs and capture the gold fields.
and place them face down in the
GAmE BOARD SEt-up northern unexplored area as shown.
Do the same with the orange sun-
Assembling the Game Board Frame
backed gold field hexes and standard
If you have the board from scenario 1 already set up, extend hexes, placing them in the southern unexplored area.
the frame used in scenario 1 by adding the B1 frame pieces. Place the green moon and orange sun number tokens in
Use sea hex E to fill the gap between sea hex D1 and sea hex separate face-down stacks as shown in example 10.
piece F1. Otherwise, build the board exactly as shown in
example 10 below.
Hexes used in this scenario:
Creating the Starting Island
Place the terrain hexes and number tokens of the base Catan
=
game in the starting island area, as shown below.
Hint: When you play the scenario a second time, if you
want to make the game more variable, you should shuffle
the terrain hexes face down and randomly place them in the
starting island area. However, the position of the number =
tokens should never change.
Example 10:
BB33 BB11 6 green moon
number tokens
1111 99
•••• ••••••••
33 88 CC11 6 pirate lair
•••• •••••••••• tokens
AA11 44 1100
•••••• ••••••••
66 1122 88 DD11 EE FF11 FF22
•••••••••• •• ••••••••••
AA22
1100 44
•••••••• ••••••
2 new
1111 66 CC22
•••• •••••••••• frame pieces and
1 new sea hex
33 55
•••• •••• ••••
6 orange sun
BB33 BB11
number tokens
99
Additional Preparations ENCOuNtERING pIRAtE LAIRS
• Each player takes pieces as shown below.
Discovering Pirate Lairs
• For this scenario, you also need the game components
If you discover a gold field hex, it is always occupied by a
included in the “Pirate LairS” bag. Place the “Pirate LairS”
pirate lair. You immediately receive 2 gold for the discovery
mission card and the corresponding VP card beside the
as shown in example 11 A (below). You then take a pirate
game board. Each player places a marker on the “S” space
lair token from the supply stack (example 11 B) and place it
of the mission card.
(without turning it over) on the pirate lair (example 11 C).
• Shuffle the 6 pirate lair tokens with their number
Important: As long as there is a pirate lair on a gold field
side face down and place them as a stack beside
hex, it is referred to as a pirate lair hex. You cannot build a
the board (example 10, page 9).
road on its paths (edges) or a settlement on its intersections
(corners). Once the pirate lair is captured, you may build on
Each player chooses a color and takes:
the gold field normally.
Example 11: Discovering a Pirate Lair
5 settlements 15 roads 4 harbor 3 ships
settlements A C
B
2 settlers 9 crews 1 pirate ship 1 marker 2 gold
SEt-up pHASE
Free Set-up
Capturing Pirate Lairs
Using the turn order described in base Catan, each player
places a harbor settlement first and a regular settlement
Placing Crews
second on the starting island (each without a road). Your
During pirate missions your crews can become warriors. If
harbor settlement must be placed on one of the intersections
your ship has 1 or 2 crews on board, and one end of the ship
marked with a circle ( ) in example 10 (page 9). The
points toward an intersection of a pirate lair hex, you may
regular settlement may be placed on any intersection, including
place these crews directly on the pirate lair token if you wish. A
those marked with a circle. You must, of course, observe the
maximum of 3 crews may stand on a pirate lair.
distance rule when building all harbor settlements and regular
Important: You can only place crews on specific
settlements. Your starting resources are 1 card from each
destinations (an active pirate lair token in this scenario).
terrain hex adjacent to your starting settlement (not harbor
You are never allowed to place crews on any hex that does
settlement).
not contain a destination.
The last player to place a settlement is the first to place a
Capturing
road adjacent to that settlement. That same player then places
As soon as you place the 3rd crew piece on a pirate lair (all 3
a settler ship (ship + settler) on one of the sea routes adjacent
crews do not have to be your own, see example 12), the lair is
to their harbor settlement. The other players follow clockwise.
captured. After you finish your movement phase, the results of
Once everyone has placed their pieces, the starting player
the pirate lair capture are resolved as described below.
begins the game by rolling the dice.
Each player who participated in the capture immediately
Deploying Neutral Game Pieces in a 2-Player Game
receives 2 gold as a reward. In addition, each participating
After both players have placed their respective harbor
player moves their marker forward 1 space on the mission
settlement, beginning with the starting player, each player
card’s victory point scoring track (mission progress). The
places a harbor settlement of a neutral, non-chosen color.
player whose turn it is begins; the other players follow in
Once both players have placed their neutral harbor settlements,
clockwise order.
using the same turn order, they each place a settlement of the
neutral color.
1100
Determining Heroes Gold Production at Gold Field Hexes
Each participating player rolls 1 die. Add to your result the You may now build roads on the edges of
number of your crews placed on the pirate lair. If your sum total the liberated gold field. You may also build
is the largest, you are the hero of the battle. Move your marker settlements and harbor settlements on its
forward 1 space on the “Pirate LairS” mission card. At the same intersections. If a gold field’s number
time, you must remove 1 of your crews and return it to your is rolled during a production roll,
supply. each player receives 2 gold per
If there is a tie, the player who placed more crews is the hero. settlement or harbor settlement
If there is still a tie, the tying players repeat the die roll. If you they have on an intersection
capture a pirate lair all by yourself, you automatically move your bordering that gold field.
marker forward 1 space. You also lose 1 of your crews.
ENDING tHE GAmE
After the Capture
You win “Pirate LairS” if you
Turning the Pirate Lair Token Over have 12 VPs on your turn.
To indicate that a pirate lair was captured, the pirate lair
token is flipped over so that its number side faces up. For that
purpose, slide the remaining crews aside and place them next
to the flipped token. You may pick up your crews with a ship on
a subsequent turn.
Example 12: Capturing a Pirate Lair
C
(C) At the end of Red’s turn, she resolves the capture.
She turns the pirate lair token over so that its number
side is face up. Blue and Red each move their markers
forward 1 space on the “Pirate Lairs” mission card. Then
A
they determine the hero. Red rolls a “5” and adds 2 (her
(A) Red moves her ship loaded with 2 crews beside an number of crews). Blue rolls a “6” and adds 1—they
intersection of a gold field occupied by a pirate lair. tie (7 to 7). Since Red has 1 more crew, she is the winner.
Additionally, Blue already has a crew there. Red moves her marker forward 1 more space on the
mission card. Red must also return 1 of her crews to
her supply.
B
(B) Red places her 2 crews on the pirate lair. When
D
combined with Blue’s crew, there are now 3 crews on
the pirate lair. The pirate lair is captured. Red and Blue (D) During any of their following turns, Red and Blue
immediately receive 2 gold each. may pick up their respective crews with their ships.
1111
fISH fOR CAtAN Assembling the Unexplored Areas
Remove the 2 green moon-backed
This scenario is played with all of the game components of
and 2 orange sun-backed sea hexes
both the “Pirate LairS” and the “FiSH For Catan” mission.
from the standard hexes.
GAmE BOARD SEt-up Take the following 11 green
moon-backed hexes and shuffle them
Assembling the Game Board Frame
together: 6 standard hexes, 3 pirate
If you have the board from scenario 2 already set up, remove
lair hexes, and 2 random fish shoal hexes
all of the starting island, green moon, and orange sun hexes and
(don’t look at the front side). Place them,
place them in separate piles. Replace the D1 sea hex with the
green moon side up, in the northern unexplored area.
D2 “Council of Catan” hex. Otherwise, build the frame exactly
Take the following 11 orange sun-backed hexes and shuffle
as shown in example 13 below.
them together: 6 standard hexes, 2 pirate lair hexes, and 3 fish
Creating the Starting Island shoal hexes. Place them, orange sun side up, in the southern
Shuffle the chosen terrain hexes and place them randomly in unexplored area.
the area of the starting island, terrain side face up. Afterwards, Without looking at them, put the unused fish shoal and pirate
place the number tokens as shown in example 13. lair hexes back into their respective bags.
Hexes used in this scenario: Each player chooses a color and takes:
=
5 settlements 15 roads 4 harbor 3 ships
settlements
=
2 settlers 9 crews 1 pirate ship 2 markers 2 gold
Example 13:
BB33 BB11
6 green moon
number tokens
1111 99
•••• ••••••••
6 pirate lair
tokens
33 88 CC11
•••• ••••••••••
AA11 44 1100
•••••• ••••••••
66 1122 88 DD22 EE FF11 FF22
•••••••••• •• ••••••••••
AA22 1100 44 •••••••• ••••••
1111 66 CC22
•••• ••••••••••
Council of Catan
33 55 sea hex
•••• •••• ••••
BB33 BB11
6 orange sun
number tokens
1122
sriaL etariP
.srial
etarip tsom eht reuqnoc :noissiM
ehT
Greatest Pirate Scourge
nataC rof hsiF
nataC
fo licnuoC
eht ot sluah hsif tsom eht
gnirb
:noissiM
ehT
2 VP cards
Best Fisher
2 mission cards
pREpARAtION Roll 1 die. If the result matches any discovered fish shoal
hex, take 1 fish haul from the supply and place it on this hex.
• Each player takes pieces as shown on page 12.
However, you are not allowed to place the fish haul on a fish
• Place the “Pirate LairS” and “FiSH For Catan”
shoal hex if:
mission cards and the corresponding VP cards
• there already is a fish haul on the hex, or
beside the game board. Each of you places 1 of
Best
your markers on the “S” space of the mission Fisher • there is a pirate ship on the hex.
cards. If you roll the number of an undiscovered fish shoal hex, do
• Shuffle the 6 pirate lair tokens with their number not place a fish haul. Also, if the supply of fish hauls is depleted,
sides face down. Place them in a stack beside the you cannot roll the die for fish haul placement.
game board as shown. Catching a Fish Haul
• Place the 6 fish hauls beside the game board.
You can catch a fish haul if either end of one of your empty
ships points toward a fish shoal hex with a fish haul (example
SEt-up pHASE
14 A). Take the fish haul from the hex and put it in your ship
Use the free set-up as described in scenario 2 (page 10).
(example 14 B). A fish haul fills your ship’s hold. You can’t
The Council of Catan load more game pieces onto that ship until the haul has been
delivered.
The Council of Catan resides on an island
stronghold just off the eastern shore of the
Example 14: Catching a Fish Haul
starting island. This hex is considered
A B
to be a sea hex. No roads may be built
on the 5 edges of this hex that border
other sea hexes. Settlements and
harbor settlements cannot be built on
the 4 sea-only intersections. You can
build on the edge and intersections that
border the starting island. A pirate ship may If you have moved your ship to a fish haul and caught it
not be placed on this hex (it borders the starting island). (loaded it onto the ship), you may continue moving if that ship
still has movement points.
tHE mISSIONS
Delivering a Fish Haul
Mission 1 “Pirate LairS”: Use all game rules as described
On a small island, the Council of Catan has a station with
through scenario 2.
2 harbors for unloading your fish hauls (indicated by anchor
Mission 2 “FiSH For Catan”: To secure the population’s food
symbols). If either end of your fish haul-loaded ship points
supply, the Council of Catan sends the players to an area where
toward one of these stations, you may unload that ship. To
fish abound. The players’ task is to locate the fish shoals and
return the fish haul, simply return the fish haul to the supply
catch as many fish as possible and deliver the hauls to the docks
and move your marker forward 1 space on the “FiSH For Catan”
at the Council of Catan’s island stronghold.
mission card.
DISCOvERING A fISH SHOAL HEx If you haven’t used all of your ship’s movement points yet,
If you discover a fish shoal hex, you immediately receive 2 you may continue to move the ship after catching or unloading
gold. Note that, in addition to fish, each of the fish shoal hexes a fish haul.
shows a result of a die roll (numbers ranging from 1 to 6). Pirates Also Catch Fish
Rolling the Die to Place a Fish Haul If a pirate ship is ever placed on a fish shoal hex that contains
During your movement phase, you may roll the die to try to a fish haul, the fish haul is removed and returned to the supply.
place a fish haul on one of the discovered fish shoal hexes. You However, the pirate does not steal the cargo from adjacent ships
may make this roll before moving one of your ships or after loaded with hauls of fish.
moving one of your ships. You may never interrupt a ship’s
ENDING tHE GAmE
movement to roll the die. This roll can only be made once on
your turn. You win “FiSH For Catan” if you have 15 VPs on your turn.
1133
SpICES fOR CAtAN pREpARAtION
• Each player takes pieces as shown below.
This scenario is played with the game components of both the
“FiSH For Catan” and the “SPiCeS For Catan” mission. • Place the “SPiCeS For Catan” and “FiSH For
Catan” mission cards and the corresponding
GAmE BOARD SEt-up VP cards beside the game board. Each of you Spice B M e e s r t c hant
places 1 of your markers on the “S” space of
Assembling the Game Board Frame
the mission cards.
If you have the board from scenario 3 already set up, remove
• Place the 24 spice sacks beside the board.
all of the “Pirate LairS” hexes and tokens and return them to
their bag. Take the starting island, green moon, and orange • Place the 6 fish hauls beside the board.
sun hexes and place them in separate piles. Extend the frame
by removing the B1 frame pieces and replacing them with the Each player chooses a color and takes:
B2 frame pieces instead. Use sea hex E to fill the gap between
hex D2 and sea hex pieces F1 & F2. Place sea hex piece G
to the right of the F sea hex pieces, as shown in example 15.
5 settlements 15 roads 4 harbor 3 ships
Otherwise, build the frame exactly as shown.
settlements
Creating the Starting Island
Shuffle the chosen terrain hexes and place them randomly in
the area of the starting island, terrain side face up. Afterwards, 2 settlers 9 crews 1 pirate ship 2 markers 2 gold
place the number tokens as shown in example 15.
SEt-up pHASE
Assembling the Unexplored Areas
Use the free set-up method described in scenario 2, page 10.
Remove 1 sea hex from the green
moon-backed standard hexes. Take
Hexes used in this scenario:
the remaining 7 standard hexes, plus
the 3 green moon fish shoal hexes,
plus the 3 green moon spice hexes
=
and shuffle them together. Place
them, green moon icon face-up, in the
northern unexplored area.
=
Do the same for the orange-backed hexes, and place them in
the southern unexplored area.
Example 15:
BB33 BB22
6 green moon
number tokens
1111 99
•••• ••••••••
33 88 CC11
•••• ••••••••••
AA11 44 1100
•••••• ••••••••
66 1122 88 DD22 EE FF11 FF22 GG
•••••••••• •• ••••••••••
AA22 1100 44 •••••••• ••••••
1111 66 CC22
•••• •••••••••• 2 new
frame pieces and
33 •••• •• 55 •• •••• 1 new sea hex piece
6 orange sun
BB33 BB22
number tokens
1144
nataC
rof hsiF
nataC
fo licnuoC
eht ot sluah
hsif tsom eht gnirb :noissiM
ehT
FBisehset r
nataC
rof secipS
nataC
fo licnuoC
eht ot skcas
ecips tsom eht gnirb :noissiM
ehT
2 VP cards
Spice BMeesrt c hant
2 mission cards
tHE mISSIONS Advantages of the Spice Hexes
Mission 1 “FiSH For Catan”: Use all game rules as described in If you have placed a crew on the village of a spice hex, you
scenarios 1, 2, and 3. befriend the inhabitants of this village and may immediately
(i.e., during the same turn) make use of the advantage depicted
Mission 2 “SPiCeS For Catan”: In this mission, your crews
on the spice hex. For each advantage there are 2 villages that
represent merchants sent to visit villages found on the spice
confer its power (one in the northern unexplored area, and one
hexes. You must befriend the inhabitants and obtain precious
in the southern unexplored area).
spices by trading with them. These spices must be loaded onto
ships and delivered to one of the Council of Catan’s docks. 1. Swift Voyage: The inhabitants of
+1
2 villages are experienced seafarers and
DISCOvERING A SpICE HEx help the players to move their ships faster.
If, by means of one of your ships, you have discovered a spice The “Swift Voyage” advantage immediately increases the
hex, you receive 2 gold. Afterwards, you place as many spice number of movement points of all your ships by 1. All of your
sacks on the village of the spice hex as there are players in the ships now have 5 movement points instead of 4. If you are
game. friends with both villages marked with the “Swift Voyage”
advantage, your ships have 6 movement points per turn. If you
Placing a Crew and Loading a Spice Sack
pay 1 wool, you can increase the number of movement points
If either end of one of your crew-loaded ships points toward
for a ship by 2 more points. Thus, the maximum number of
the corner of a spice hex (example 16 A), you may place 1 crew
movement points possible for your ships is 8.
on the village of the spice hex. In exchange, you load a spice
Note: The Swift Voyage advantage can immediately be
sack onto the ship (example 16 B). In addition, from now on
applied to the ship that delivered the crew to the hex as long
you have a permanent advantage in the game.
as the hex was not just discovered by this ship.
2. Pirate Bonus: The inhabitants of
2 villages are experienced fighters against
Example 16: the pirates and increase your chances to
A B successfully chase away a pirate ship.
One village depicts the face of a die with 5 pips, the other
village depicts the face of a die with 4 pips. If you are friends
with one of these villages, you drive away an opponent’s pirate
ship not only by rolling a “6” but also by rolling the number
depicted on the village. If you are friends with both villages, you
drive away the pirate ship by rolling a “6,” “5,” or “4.”
Delivering a Spice Sack
3. Fast Gold: The inhabitants of
If either end of one of your spice sack-loaded ships points
2 villages are experienced merchants. 1x ?
toward either of the docks (anchor icons) on the Council of
They buy resources and give gold in return.
Catan hex, you may unload that ship. Move your marker forward
If you are friends with one of these villages, once during
1 space on the “SPiCeS For Catan” mission card for each sack
your trade and build phase you may sell any 1 resource card
you deliver. Place the delivered sacks out of the game.
from your hand for 1 gold from the supply (put your card into
Additional Rules the supply and take 1 gold from the supply). If you are friends
• You may place only 1 crew on each spice hex. In exchange, with both villages, you may sell 1 resource for 1 gold two times
you may take or load 1 spice sack from that spice hex. during your trade and build phase.
• Once a crew has been placed on the spice hex, it must stay
ENDING tHE GAmE
there. It cannot be picked up by a ship anymore.
You win “SPiCeS For Catan” if you have 15 VPs on your turn.
• You may not build a road on the spice hex’s paths (edges)
or a settlement at its corners until you have placed a crew
on the spice hex.
• If you haven’t used all of your ship’s movement points, you
may continue to move the ship after loading or unloading a
spice sack.
1155
ExpLORERS & pIRAtES pREpARAtION
• Each player takes pieces as shown below.
This is the last scenario in this expansion. It is also the most
epic in scope. It includes all three missions “Pirate LairS,” “FiSH • Place the “Pirate LairS,” “SPiCeS For Catan,” and “FiSH For
For Catan,” and “SPiCeS For Catan.” Enjoy! Catan” mission cards and the corresponding VP cards
beside the game board. Each of you places 1 of your
GAmE BOARD SEt-up
markers on the “S” space of the mission cards.
Assembling the Game Board Frame • Place the 24 spice sacks beside the game board.
If you have the board from scenario 4 already set up, use • Place the 6 fish hauls beside the game board.
example 17 as a guide to extend the frame as follows. Add • Shuffle the 6 pirate lair tokens, number side down, and
the B1 frame pieces to the edge. Use sea hex E to fill the gap place them as a stack beside the game board.
between hex D2 and sea hex piece F1. Place sea hex piece G to
the right of sea hex piece F2. Use one of the orange sun-backed
sea hexes (sea side facing up) to fill the gap between sea hex
pieces G and A2. Otherwise, build the frame exactly as shown in
example 17 below.
Creating the Starting Island
Shuffle the chosen terrain hexes and place them randomly in
the area of the starting island, terrain side face up. Afterwards,
place the number tokens as shown in example 17.
Assembling the Unexplored Areas SEt-up pHASE
Remove 1 sea hex from the green moon-backed standard Use the free set-up method described in scenario 2, page 10.
hexes. Combine the remaining 7 standard hexes, plus 3 fish
tHE mISSIONS
hexes, 3 spice hexes, and 3 pirate lair hexes (all with green
backs), and shuffle. Place them, green moon icon face up, in All three missions are in play (“Pirate LairS,” “FiSH For
the northern unexplored area. Catan,” and “SPiCeS For Catan”). Use all game rules as described
in scenarios 1, 2, 3, and 4.
Do the same with the orange sun-backed hexes in the
southern unexplored area.
END Of tHE GAmE
You win “exPLorerS & PirateS” if you have 17 VPs on your
turn.
Example 17:
6 green moon
number tokens
BB33 BB22 BB11
3 VP cards
1 new
1111 99 frame piece
•••• ••••••••
orange sun-backed
33 88 CC11
•••• •••••••••• sea hex
AA11 44 1100
•••••• ••••••••
66 1122 88 DD22 EE FF11 FF22 GG •••••••••• •• •••••••••• AA22 1100 44 •••••••• •••••• 6 pirate lair
tokens
1111 66 CC22
•••• ••••••••••
1 new
33 •••• •• 55 •• •••• frame piece 3 mission cards
BB33 BB22 BB11 6 orange sun
number tokens
1166
nataC rof hsiF
nataC
fo licnuoC eht ot sluah hsif tsom eht gnirb :noissiM
ehT
FBisehset r
nataC rof secipS
nataC
fo licnuoC eht ot skcas ecips tsom eht gnirb :noissiM
ehT
Spice BMeesrt c hant
sriaL etariP .srial etarip tsom eht reuqnoc :noissiM ehT
Each player chooses a color and takes:
5 settlements 15 roads 4 harbor 3 ships
settlements
2 settlers 9 crews 1 pirate ship 3 markers 2 gold
PirGatree Sacteosutr ge
