Klaus Teuber
VV rr
aarriiaanntt uulleess &&
CC ss
aammppaaiiggnn CCeennaarriiooss
Dear Players,
Ten years ago, after publishing Catan–Cities & Knights™, I was asked if there would be a third expansion of the
Base Game. I answered in the negative at that time, because I thought that all wishes to experience more in Catan
had been fulfilled. With Catan–Seafarers , the game was extended spatially, and Cities & Knights provided it with
®
greater depth.
At the beginning of 2006, we started a survey in the Catan Online World where, among other things, we asked the
citizens of this virtual game world which games they would want the most. “Variants of the base game” appeared at the
very top of the wish list.
This vote encouraged me to consolidate and further develop ideas for interesting variants and expansions that had
piled up in my drawer during the past 10 years. And now you’re holding the outcome in your hands!
A campaign with 5 scenarios opens up entirely new challenges and possibilities to experience the base game in a new
fashion, and well-established variants offer alternatives to adapt the game to one’s own needs.
Hence, this expansion is all about “variants of the basic bame,” and the complexity of the last two scenarios of the
campaign almost comes up to the standard of Cities & Knights.
It is impossible to bring an expansion of this scope to a satisfactory conclusion all by oneself. I therefore want to
sincerely thank all those fellow settlers mentioned under “Rule Testing and Advice” in the Credits section of this booklet
for their valuable help.
I wish you lots of fun with Traders & Barbarians™!
— Klaus Teuber, February 2007
You can find more information at:
catan.com catanstudio.com klausteuber.com
Game Components Contents
• 98 game pieces Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .page 2
– 24 knights (6 of each color) Th•e Variants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . pages 3-7
– 12 bridges (3 of each color) • The Friendly Robber . . . . . . . . . . . . . page 3
– 4 wagons (1 of each color) • Catan Event Cards. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . page 4
– 36 barbarians (bronze color) • Harbormaster. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . page 6
– 22 camels (brown color) Catan for Two . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . page 6
• 120 cards Th•e Campaign . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . pages 8-23
– 1 set of cards for “Catan Event Cards” variant • The Fishermen of Catan* . . . . . . . . . . . page 8
– 4 cards for “The Fishermen of Catan” scenario • The Rivers of Catan* . . . . . . . . . . . . .page 10
– 1 set of cards for “Barbarian Attack” scenario • The Caravans . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .page 12
– 2 sets of cards for “Traders & Barbarians” scenario • Barbarian Attack . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .page 15
• 17 terrain tiles, fishing ground tiles, and sea frame pieces Traders & Barbarians . . . . . . . . . . . . .page 19
• 40 gold coin counters (25 small, 15 large) Credits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . page 24
• 1 special victory point card “Harbormaster,” Card Deck Manifest . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . page 24
• 4 special tiles “Wealthiest Settler (1),” and “Poor Settler (3)”
*—These 2 scenarios differ significantly from the previously
• 21 trade tokens (Catan chits)
published mini-expansions with the same names. Both
• 36 commodity tokens
scenarios have expanded rules; the first has an added lake,
• 30 fish tokens while the second has more river hexes. Read the rules for each
• 1 Variants & Scenarios booklet of these scenarios carefully before beginning play.
22
beFoRe youR FiRst Game
Carefully detach the die-cut cardboard pieces from the
frames. On the backs of the larger pieces, you will find the name
of the corresponding variant or scenario. The color of each
The Caravans
Traders &
Barbarians
back serves as an additional distinguishing characteristic—
each variant/scenario has a unique corresponding color. You
can also find those colors on the card backs. •
Variant “The Friendly Robber” . . . . . . . . Gray • Fishermen of Catan Barbarian Attack
Variant “Catan Event Cards” . . . . . . . . .Black • The Rivers of Catan
Variant “Harbormaster” . . . . . . . . . . . . .Red •
Variant “Catan for Two” . . . . . . . . Light Green •
Scenario “The Fishermen of Catan” . . .Sea Blue • note
Scenario “The Rivers of Catan” . . . . . Dark Blue • The variants can be used and combined with each other
Scenario “The Caravans” . . . . . . . . . . . .Tan • as well as with the Traders & Barbarians (T&B) scenarios,
Scenario “Barbarian Attack” . . . . . Dark Green • with Catan–Seafarers, scenarios, and to a certain extent with
Catan–Cities & Knights. (C&K) For some variant/scenario
Scenario “Traders & Barbarians” . . . . . Purple
combinations, the rules have to be slightly modified or adapted.
Such adaptations of rules are specified in each of the respective
variants and scenarios listed in this booklet.
V
ariants
TTHHEE FFRRIIEENNDDLLYY RROOBBBBEERR the Rule ChanGe
When a “7” is rolled or a knight card is played, the robber
What’s going on in the forest of Catan? Strange stories are
may not be moved to a terrain hex that is adjacent to a
coming out of the dark woods of the Black Forest, hinting
settlement of a player who only has 2 victory points.
that the dreaded robber has disappeared without a trace,
and that a young lad has taken his place. His name is said to If, because of this rule, the robber has no valid terrain hex to
be Rob de Hood, and supposedly he is only taking from rich move to, the robber moves to (or remains on) the desert hex.
travelers. Poor devils are allowed to move on… In this case, a resource card may not be taken from any player
who only has 2 victory points.
Duration of the Game: according to scenario
When using this rule, you still lose half of your resource cards
Additional Components: none
when a “7” is rolled and you have more than 7 resource cards.
What it is about
tips FoR playinG this VaRiant
Who hasn’t experienced the frustration of having the robber
This variant should always be used when playing with family
moved next to one of your settlements early in the game? Not
members, particularly when children are participating in
only may you lose a resource—the robber blocks crucial
the game.
resource production until a “7” is rolled or a knight card is
played. The “Friendly Robber” variant protects you from the
possible Combinations
robber until you have more than 2 victory points.
This variant can be combined with all other T&B variants,
T&B scenarios, and Seafarers scenarios, without rule changes.
The Islands are spring Each life is a short step on an endless
dgournee toward discoveree and the betterment of the world
33
CATAN EVENT CARDS pRepaRation
Separate out the “Brief Rules” card and the “New Year” card.
“Every man is the architect of his own fortune.”—This
proverb is also true in Catan. Pick up the dice and challenge a) Shuffle the remaining 36 cards.
fortune each time anew! Of course, sometimes one will be b) Place 5 of the shuffled cards face down to start the event
at odds with the forces controlling fate, when one’s own card deck.
numbers won’t come up and fortune only smiles on the c) Place the New Year card face down on top of these
other players. 5 cards.
d) Place the remaining shuffled cards face down on top of the
But now it seems that so-called “scientists” have
New Year card.
succeeded in making “fortune” a more calculable affair—by
applying statistical methods. And it actually seems to work! You have prepared the event card deck and are ready to begin
Although, from what one hears, the use of mathematics also play. Each turn, reveal the top event card, then resolve any event
has unpleasant consequences: it is no longer possible to shown first, and finally produce resources using the number on
excuse one’s own defeat by saying that one’s numbers didn’t the circular chit on the card.
come up… When the “New Year” is revealed, repeat the preparation
Duration of the Game: According to scenario process above to create a new event card deck (then reveal the
top card, resolve any event, and produce resources using the
Additional Components: 1 event deck (as shown here):
number on the new card).
Note: Each time the deck is prepared, 5 cards are excluded
from play until the next time the deck is prepared. This
creates some uncertainty to the final resource rolls as the
deck runs out. If having a perfect dice distribution is more
important to you, feel free to play through all 36 cards
without the New Year card, and simply reshuffle when all
cards have been used!
additional Rules
Robber Attacks! (Prod. #: “7”)
1. Each player with more than 7 cards
must discard half (rounded down). 2. Move the robber. Draw 1 random
resource card from any 1 player
with a settlement and/or city next to
the robber’s new hex.
Epidemic (Prod. #s: “6” and “8”)
Each player receives only 1 resource
for each of their cities that produce
What it is about
this turn.
These cards replace the dice! On your turn, you don’t Cities & Knights: You may not take
roll the dice; instead, you turn the top of the event card deck a commodity card.
face up. The number in the upper right corner of the card is
Earthquake (Prod. #: “6”)
the “roll.” It determines which terrain hexes produce resources
Each player turns 1 (maximum) of
(if any).
their roads sideways (at a 90° angle).
That face-up card may also trigger a particular event. There
You may not build roads until your
are a total of 11 different events, and almost half of the cards
turned road is repaired. The repairs
have events.
cost 1 lumber and 1 brick. Roads
The statistically correct distribution of the numbers on the turned sideways are still counted
cards reduces the randomness produced by dice rolls. However, towards the “Longest Road.” You may
in exchange, the events inject new elements of chance into the not build a settlement adjacent to a
game—thus producing a slightly different ambience. damaged road.
44
HbmG nataC 5102
©
ROBBER ATTACKS! 7
••••••
1. Each player with more than 7 cards must discard half of their
cards (rounded down). 2. Move the robber. Draw 1 random resource or commodity card from
any 1 player with a settlement and/or city next to the robber’s new hex.
HbmG
nataC 5102
©
EARTHQUAKE 66
•••••
Each player turns 1 (maximum)
of their roads sideways.
You may not build roads until
you pay 1 lumber and 1 brick to
repair your turned road. Roads turned sideways still count towards the “Longest Road.”
HbmG nataC
5102
©
EPIDEMIC 88
•••••
Each player receives only
1 resource for each of their
cities that produce this turn.
C&K: You may not take
a commodity card.
HbmG
nataC 5102 ©
ROBBER ATTACKS! 7
••••••
1. Each player with more than
7 cards must discard half of their
cards (rounded down). 2. Move the robber. Draw 1 random resource or commodity card from any 1 player with a settlement and/or city next to the
robber’s new hex.
1 Brief
Rules Card
HbmG nataC 5102 ©
Production
“Roll”
36 Event
Cards
NEW YEAR
1 New
Year Card e vent 1 c . a S rd h s u ( ffl e x e c a e l p l t t h th e i s one). 2. Put 5 event cards face down and
place this card on top of those 5. 3. Place the remaining 31 event
cards on top of this card to form a new draw pile. 4. Draw the top card to begin the turn.
Catan eVent CaRds bRieF Rules This event deck replaces the production die roll! Notreo:ll Ftohre CCeiivtteiineesst &&di eKK.nniigghhttss, you still have to
1. Remove this card and the New Year card. 2. 5Sh ouff flt hee tmhe f arceem daoinwinng ( 3w6it hevoeunt tl ocoarkdins ga natd t hpeumt ). 3. Place the New Year card on top of these 5 cards. Optthioesnea 5l :c Sahrdusf.fl e the New Year card with
4. oPfl atchee steh e6 rceamrdasin.ing 31 cards face down on top
– AcSn C ae t u & rc t m yur hd K o i o e. b s n : g ue F ed h b R i r , tt er flo h sps g c il t h e l i r p o , n oo t rr rn ah dw en ei e u d sn n c e oc g a r e d i le v n r v f o i de e o a e f t n . t r h t e v h I h t e p a af ee d c rl u y x uo h i e p o e e v ge p u t s e r u e e s n e t v r rh rh s tn eo o a s r s, rl t w i h ly c fl g m o a a h n i t pw r i ta c m di tc no in c s o t v e h . o y e r t n h n r t g h e e a tte h r h tl . e ee o ,w tc 66• o • a e • pr • r • d . E E f v fe e c n t t s C& R K o e l v l ent
– Rreevpeeaal tt hstee pNse w1- 4Ye eaarc cha tridm.e you
Good Neighbors (Prod. #: “6”) Conflict (Prod. #: “3”)
Each player gives the player to their The player with the most face-up
left 1 resource of the giver’s choice (if knight cards takes 1 resource card at
they have one). random from any one player. If there is
Cities & Knights: Instead of a a tie for most, ignore the effects of
resource, you may give a commodity. this event.
You must give a commodity if that’s all Cities & Knights: The player with
you have in your hand. the highest total value of active
Tournament (Prod. #: “5”) knights takes a random resource/
commodity card. If tied, ignore the
The player(s) with the most knight
effect. You may not take a
cards revealed takes 1 resource of their
progress card.
choice from the bank.
Plentiful Year (Prod. #: “2”)
Cities & Knights: The player(s) with
the most active knight points takes a Each player takes 1 resource of
resource card. You may not take (1) their choice from the supply.
commodity card. Cities & Knights: You may not take
Trade Advantage (Prod. #: “5”) a commodity card.
The player with the “Longest Road” Cards Without Events (Prod. #s:
card (if not claimed, the player with “3,” “4,” 2x “5,” 2x “6,” 4x “8,”
more roads than any other player) may 3x “9,” 2x “10,” “11”)
take one resource card from any player. The settlers labor. Catan prospers!
You may not take a development card.
Note: No event occurs.
Cities & Knights: You may not take a
New Year progress card.
1. Shuffle all the event cards (except
Calm Sea (Prod. #s: “9” and “12”)
this one).
The player(s) with the most harbors
2. Put 5 event cards face down and
receives 1 resource card of their choice
place this card on top of those 5.
from the supply.
3. Place the remaining 31 event cards
Cities & Knights: You may not take a face down on top of this card to commodity card. form a new draw pile. Robber Flees (Prod. #s: 2x “4”)
4. Draw the top card to begin
The robber returns to the desert. Do
the turn.
not draw a card from any player.
Neighborly Assistance possible Combinations:
(Prod. #s: “10” and “11”) This variant can be combined with all other T&B variants,
The player(s) with the most victory T&B scenarios, and Seafarers scenarios, without rule changes.
points give(s) 1 player with fewer For Cities & Knights: Roll the C&K event die every time you
victory points 1 resource card of the turn over an event card. If the event die shows a city gate, use
giver’s choice. If a giver doesn’t have a the red die value shown in the lower right corner of the event
resource card to give, that giver ignores card for progress cards. Then play proceeds normally.
this event card effect.
Cities & Knights: You may give a
commodity in place of a resource. You
must give a commodity if that’s all you
have.
leave the womb discover and
better our world
55
HbmG nataC
5102
©
CALM SEAS 99
••••
The player(s) with the most harbors receive(s) 1 resource card of their choice from the bank. C&K: You may not take a commodity card.
HbmG
nataC
5102 ©
ROBBER FLEES! 44
•••
The robber returns
to the desert.
Do not draw a card
from any player.
HbmG nataC 5102
©
TOURNAMENT 55
••••
The player(s) with the most knight
cards revealed takes 1 resource of
their choice from the bank.
C&K: The player(s) with the most
active knight points takes
1 resource card. You may not take a commodity card.
HbmG
nataC 5102
©
TRADE ADVANTAGE 55 ••••
The player with the “Longest Road” card (if not claimed, the player
with more roads than any other
player) may take 1 resource card from any player. You may not take
a development card.
C&K: You may not take a progress card.
HbmG
nataC 5102
©
66 •••••
The settlers labor. Catan prospers!
HbmG nataC
5102
©
NEW YEAR
1. Shuffl e all the
event cards (except this one).
2. Put 5 event cards face down and place this card on top of those 5. 3. Place the remaining 31 event cards on top of this card to form a new draw pile. 4. Draw the top card to begin the turn.
HbmG nataC 5102
©
NEIGHBORLY
ASSISTANCE 1100 •••
The player(s) with the most VPs
give(s) 1 player with fewer VPs
1 resource card of the giver’s choice.
If a giver doesn’t have a resource card
to give, that giver ignores this event.
C&K: You may give a commodity
in place of a resource. You must give a commodity if that’s all you have.
HbmG nataC 5102
©
PLENTIFUL YEAR 22•
Each player takes 1 resource
of their choice from the bank.
C&K: You may not take
a commodity card.
HbmG nataC
5102
©
GOOD NEIGHBORS 66
•••••
Each player gives the player to
their left 1 resource of the giver’s choice (if they have one).
C&K: Instead of a resource, you
may give a commodity. You
must give a commodity if that’s
all you have in your hand. HbmG nataC
5102
©
CONFLICT 33
••
The player with the “Largest Army”
card (if not claimed, each player with the most knight cards) takes 1 resource card at random from
any one player.
C&K: Each player with the highest
total value of active knights takes
1 random resource/commodity card. You may not take
a progress card.
HHAARRBBOORRMMAASSTTEERR CCAATTAANN FFOORR TTWWOO
With its dangers and temptations, the sea has always The Catanians are sociable people. They get together
attracted adventurous people. They congregate in harbors, and have fun—groups of four have the most enjoyable
which is why harbors are home to an exceptional number experiences, although life can still be very exciting for
of adventurers. Whoever can control those savage hordes of groups of three. More and more frequently, however, groups
adventurers is undoubtedly destined for greater things— of two can be seen searching for adventure all by themselves.
maybe even the title of Harbormaster! Will it be the first step But wait a minute, these people can be helped: now the
towards even higher honors? fun for two plus two has arrived! Two are real, the other two
Duration of the Game: According to scenario imaginary—give the challenge of “Catan for Two” a try!
Additional Components: 1 Harbormaster special VP card Duration of the Game: According to scenario
Additional Components: 20 trade tokens
What it is about
As trade becomes more and
more important on Catan, the
harbors have an ever-increasing
relevance. Settlements and
cities at harbors provide
Harbormaster
“harbor points.” 2 Victory Points!
The first player to acquire 3 harbor
The player with the most points gets this card. Another player 20 Trade Tokens (Catan chits)
who acquires more harbor points
harbor points receives takes this card.
2 special victory points. pRepaRation
pRepaRation Place the two sets of game pieces not chosen by the players
beside the game board. They will serve as game components for
Place the “Harbormaster” special card beside the board.
the two imaginary neutral players.
the Game Also place the trade tokens beside the board. At the beginning
of the game, each player receives 5 trade tokens.
The normal rules for Catan apply. If you have 11 or more
victory points during your turn, the game ends and you are
set-up
the winner.
Set up the terrain hexes as usual in the white area shown
additional Rules below. For each neutral player, place 1 settlement (without a
road) on one of the intersections of the game board marked in
• A settlement at a harbor gives 1 harbor point.
the following illustration.
A city at a harbor gives 2 harbor points.
• The first player to acquire 3 harbor points receives
the “Harbormaster” special card, worth 2 victory points.
• If another player acquires more harbor points, that player
takes the Harbormaster card and the 2 victory points.
possible Combinations
This variant can be combined with all other T&B variants,
T&B scenarios, and Seafarers scenarios, without rule changes.
For any scenario, the normal number of victory points required
for victory should be increased by one point.
66
You and your opponents then build your two starting Replenishing Trade Tokens
settlements with roads, according to the normal set-up rules.
• Once during your turn, you may discard one of your
Therefore, after finishing the set-up phase, each player has
face-up knight cards and take 2 trade tokens in exchange.
2 settlements and 2 roads on the game board, while each
If you hold the Largest Army card and discard a face-up
neutral player has 1 settlement.
knight card, you might have to set aside the Largest Army
card. If you only have only 2 face-up knight cards after
the Game
discarding, set it aside. If you and your opponent have the
In general, the normal 3-4 player rules for Catan apply. The
same number of face-up knight cards (or your opponent
changes are described below.
has more) after discarding, set it aside. Thereafter, a player
that has the most (at least 3) face-up knight cards takes the
additional Rules
Largest Army card.
Rolling for Production
• When you build a settlement adjacent to the desert hex,
On your turn, you roll the dice twice in a row. It is essential take 2 trade tokens (also applies during the set-up phase).
that the two dice roll results differ from one another. Should • When you build a settlement on the coast, you take 1 trade
the second dice roll give the same result as the first one, roll token (also applies during the set-up phase).
again—as many times as necessary to produce two different
• When you build a settlement adjacent to both the desert
results. Immediately after each of the two dice rolls, the two real
and the coast, you take 3 trade tokens (also applies during
players obtain resources and/or move the robber (a “7” result).
the set-up phase).
Building Progress of the Neutral Players
possible Combinations
When you build a road or a settlement, you must also build
This variant can be combined (without rule changes) with all
(for free) 1 road or 1 settlement for either of the two neutral
other T&B variants, and with T&B and Seafarers scenarios in
players. If there is no legal settlement location for the neutral
which the Largest Army is not excluded.
players, you must build a road instead.
For Combination with Catan Event Cards: On your turn,
When you build a city or buy a development card, the
you draw two event cards instead of rolling the dice.
neutral players are not affected. The neutral players do not
receive resources; however, a neutral player can obtain the If the second card has the same production result as the
Longest Road. first, no further cards are drawn. The production result is
applied twice.
Using Trade Tokens to Take Actions
For Combination with Cities & Knights: 2-player rules
On your turn, you may pay 1 or 2 trade tokens and take one
have been developed for Cities & Knights. However, they are
of these actions:
too extensive to fit here. If you are interested in playing Catan:
• Action “Forced Trade”: You draw 2 random cards from
Cities & Knights with 2 players, go to:
your opponent’s hand; in exchange, you give your opponent
catan.com/service/combinations/catan-2-cities-and-knights.
2 cards of your choice from your own hand. If your
opponent only has 1 card, you can take it, but still must
give that opponent 2 cards in exchange.
• Action “Move Robber”: You may move the robber to the
desert hex.
If your victory point total is fewer than or equal to your
opponent’s total, you must pay 1 trade token to take an action.
Otherwise, an action costs you 2 trade tokens. Return spent
trade tokens to the supply.
77
C s
ampaign Cenarios
This Campaign consists of 5 different scenarios—starting with the simple “The Fishermen of Catan” and ending with the
somewhat more complex “Traders & Barbarians.” Because of the increasing level of difficulty, we recommend that you play
the scenarios in sequential order. In theory, each scenario in this Campaign can be combined and played with each other
T&B scenario, and with Catan–Cities & Knights and each Catan–Seafarers scenario. In practice, each combination of
scenarios would need an adaptation of the rules. A description of each possible combination would go beyond the scope of
these rules. You can find the most useful possible scenario combinations at catan.com. Please stop by our website once in a
while to see what else is new in the world of Catan!
TTHHEE FFIISSHHEERRMMEENN OOFF CCAATTAANN What it is about
The coasts and lakes of Catan are teeming with fish, but fish
After the settlers have built their first settlements, created
has been a rare, though known commodity on Catan. So, what
agricultural crop land and multiplied their
could be more obvious than sending fishermen to the shores of
flocks of sheep on the fertile pastures of Catan,
Catan to retrieve the precious goods from the depths of the lake
they lean back in their chairs, satisfied. Totally
and the sea?
satisfied? No, not totally. It’s true that lamb
The fish caught soon proves to be a coveted commodity. For
and bread are delicious food—but every day
2 fish, the robber voluntarily leaves Catan. For 4 fish, the bank
the same dish makes some settlers wish their
forks out a resource. For 5 fish, workers don’t mind building a
menu would show a little more diversity. Thus,
road for free…
it is only a matter of time until a couple of settlers equip
themselves with fishing rods and nets and try their luck on
pRepaRation
the shores of Catan or the recently discovered lake. Meaning • Replace the desert hex with the lake hex. The lake cannot
that for Catan’s fish populations, the peaceful times have be placed on the edge of the island (i.e., the coast).
definitely come to an end... • Mix the fish tokens and the old boot token together face
Note: This scenario differs significantly from the scenario down and place them near the resource cards.
previously published with the same name. This scenario • On each frame section, place a fishing ground tile on a free
has expanded rules and an added lake hex. Read these rules vertex such that each points towards the island.
carefully before beginning play. • If you place your second settlement adjacent to a fishing
ground tile, you receive a fish token (see below) in
Duration of the Game: About 45-60 minutes
addition to your normal starting resources.
Additional Components: See illustration below • Place the robber beside the game board. It enters the game
only when the first “7” is rolled.
6 fishing ground tiles 1 lake hex
(prod. #s: 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, 10) (prod. #s: 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, 10)
29 fish tokens
2r(t o h h Fb ee ib s nreh ee re — x fnt r tt oY eim mo rs u e t t hm ha ee a “ 2r (t gy g7h oh aa F ”e b r e mm e ib in s r m s eee h ee r r o xe b— ot fn vo r l e tt a l oei Y e r m t mr o d hd s u )e e t . t hha me e“ a g 7g ya a” rmm e is mee r ob o vo l e l a e rt d hd ) e . x 11 Lake
3da rn Fao iwt s h h1e — rr ep Ysla ooy uue rr mc.e3d a a y nr frF ao oiwt sm h h1e — r r peYslaoo yuu er r mc.ea yfr om
41c h Froei i sscoh eu— frrco Yem o ou ft h mye 4o1c a u h b y rFr o aei t ins as co k k h eu e . — fr rco Yem o ou ft h myeoa ub yra t n a k k . e x 10
5i1m F rmo is aeh dd— iafoteY rl oyfr u be e mu5i1.im al dF r y mo is aeh dd— ifaoter Y loyfr u eb eum .ilady
HbmG nataC 5102 © 7m1c a aF dr yi ed s vd h ef r o — laor w pf Y mr o e HbmG nataCe 510 u 2e © n. 7mt1c a aF dr yi ed s vd h fer ol —aor w pf Y rme o ee u n. t x 8
4 overview cards 1 old boot
(1 per player) token
88
HbmG nataC 5102 ©
2r(th oh e Fbe ib nr se ee hr xe — tnf r tto ie Y m mr o se u tt a hh m ee“ a t7 (rgg 2 h yoh ” aa e r bemm F i e ns bi r mee s e ee r h x rbo o e t — nov l f l r t e ta ei oe m r d Yt rmdho ) se e . u tt ah hm ee “ 7 a ggy ”aa m rm is e e em r o bo l ov le ea d rtd ) h . e
3danr Faowi t s h h e1r — r pelsY aoo yuu er r mc.ead3a nfyr r ao F owt i mh s e h1 r — rpelsY aoo yue urr .cmea fyr om
41ch rF oei iss coh eu — frrcoeY m oo uft h ym eco14 a hu b ry o F ra e i it n sc as k oe kh . u e— frr coeY m oo u tfh ym eo aub yra n ta k k . e
5i1m r Fmo i a sed hd —ifaotreY lf oyr u eb eum 1i5 . mi l a rd Fmo y i a sed hd i— faotreY lfyo r e ube um .ilady
7m1ca ad F r y de i s v d fe h o rl —aor wpfrm Y e© 2 o 015 Catan GmbH ee u .nc 1m7 ta da r F d ye i v sd feo hrlr ao — wpfrm Y e o ee. u n t
the Game speCial Cases
The normal rules for Catan apply. The changes are described • 7 fish tokens at most: You are not allowed have more
on the next page. than 7 fish tokens at any one time. If you already have 7
fish tokens and would obtain another 1 or 2 fish tokens
additional Rules
for a settlement or city, you may exchange one of your fish
Fishing tokens with a fish token from the supply (hoping for a
Each fishing ground tile touches 3 coastal intersections. token with more fish on it).
Settlements and cities built on these intersections have a chance • You cannot “make change”: If the number of fish on
to collect fish tokens. Each fishing ground tile shows a dice roll
your tokens is more than the purchase price, you lose the
number. When the number on a fishing ground tile matches
excess fish.
the number on the production dice roll, each settlement or city
• Multiple actions per turn are allowed: You may use
adjacent to that fishing ground tile collects fish tokens. Each
fish tokens for more than 1 action during the same turn.
settlement collects 1 token, while each city collects 2.
However, you must perform the actions one by one and
If you have a settlement or city on an intersection adjacent to
independently from one another. For example, you are not
the lake hex, you may draw a fish token (2 for a city) whenever
allowed to pay 2 tokens with 3 fish each, thereby moving
a 2, 3, 11, or 12 is rolled.
the robber to the desert (2 fish), and take 1 resource from
Fish tokens are drawn randomly from the supply. If there are
the bank (4 fish).
not enough fish tokens to fulfill everyone’s production, no one
receives any fish tokens that turn. • Fish tokens are not resources: Fish tokens do not
count as resource cards, so do not count them toward
When you draw a fish token, examine it. If it is the old boot
token, you must reveal it immediately (see below). If it shows your hand limit and do not discard them when a “7” is
fish, keep it face down in front of you until you choose to spend rolled on the dice. Similarly, the robber cannot be used to
it. steal fish tokens.
• Harbors and fishing grounds: If you have a settlement
or city on an intersection that touches both a harbor and a
fishing ground tile, you receive both benefits.
• If the fish tokens are depleted: When the last face-
down fish token is drawn, turn over all the used fish tokens
and mix them again to form a new supply.
• No fish trading: Fish tokens may not be traded
between players.
Lake hex with production Fishing ground with
numbers 2, 3, 11, and 12 production number 6
an old boot …
If you draw the old boot, you must reveal it immediately! After
rolling the dice on your turn, you can give the old boot away.
Actions with Fish Cards You can give the boot to any other player who has the same
On each fish token, 1, 2, or 3 fish are depicted. During number of victory points as you or more victory points than you.
your turn, you can discard fish tokens in order to take certain However, if you alone have the most points, you must keep the
actions. You may discard multiple fish tokens to perform more old boot for yourself.
useful actions. The more fish you discard, the bigger the benefit: As long as the old boot is in your possession, you need 1
2 fish— Remove the robber from the board (do not steal additional victory point to win the game! So, you would need
any cards) until it enters the game again (via a 11 victory points to win the Catan base game. The old boot
“7” or the use of a knight card). is, therefore, not a negative victory point. Anyone who owns it
3 fish— Steal a random resource card from another player. merely needs one additional victory point to win.
4 fish— Take a resource of your choice from the bank.
endinG the Game
5 fish— Build a free road (as per normal building rules).
7 fish— Draw a free development card. The game ends as soon as a player has enough points during
their turn to win (10 normally, 11 if you have the old boot).
Place the fish tokens you spend face up next to the supply of
fish tokens.
99
Combination With VaRiants TTHHEE RRIIVVEERRSS OOFF CCAATTAANN
This scenario can be combined with any of this expansion’s
While some settlers have totally committed themselves to
variants.
fishing, others are settling near the rivers of Catan. These
For combination with “Catan for Two” rivers are proving to be the true lifelines of the island. The
river trade is flourishing particularly well—as reflected in
• During set-up, each player receives 5 fish tokens: 2 tokens
profits of sheer gold!
with 1 fish each, 2 tokens with 2 fish each, and 1 token
with 3 fish. The remaining fish tokens are shuffled and No wonder that soon roads are appearing along the rivers,
placed face down beside the game board. and mighty bridges are crossing the water. Everyone wants
to be the wealthiest settler of the island. But it often happens
• Trade tokens are not used. The player who has fewer
that, while one gets rich, many others get poor. How will you
victory points needs 1 fewer fish for each action.
fare?
• New fish tokens are only obtained when the number of
Note: This scenario differs significantly from the scenario
a fishing ground tile or the lake hex is rolled—not by
previously published with the same name. This scenario
building a settlement on the coast or by discarding
has expanded rules and more river hexes. Read these rules
a knight card.
carefully before beginning play.
For combination with “Catan Event Cards”
• Robber Flees: Place the robber beside the game board until Duration of the Game: About 45-60 minutes
it is used again (via a “7” or by playing a knight card). Additional Components: See illustration below
When combined with the “Harbormaster” variant, this
scenario should be played until one player reaches 11 victory 2 sea frame pieces
(replace frame pieces
points during their turn (12 victory points with the old boot).
labeled 4-5 and 5-6)
3 river tiles
(a 3-hex river on 1 tile, and
a 4-hex river on 2 tiles)
12 bridges (3 of each color) 1 Wealthiest Settler tile
1 Poor Settler tile
40 gold coins
What it is about
For each road and each settlement you build adjacent to a
river hex, you receive 1 coin. You can trade 2 coins for any one
resource of your choice. If you have the most coins, you are the
Wealthiest Settler, which earns you a special victory point. But
be careful! If you squander your coins, you could easily become
a Poor Settler and thus lose 2 victory points.
1100
pRepaRation
• Assemble the frame and place the 3 river tiles as shown
in the illustration at the right. Replace two frame pieces
from Catan base game (labeled 4–5 and 5–6) with the
Intersection Adjacent to a River Hex
corresponding frame pieces provided in this expansion.
• Remove from play the following terrain hexes from Catan
base game: 2 mountains hexes, 2 hills hexes, 2 pasture
hexes, 1 desert hex. Use the remaining terrain hexes to
create the rest of the island. Swampland Hex Path Adjacent to a River
• When placing number tokens, skip the two swampland
hexes and do not place tokens on them.
• Place the first number token “A” on any coastal hex. Then,
skip number token “2” (B) and set it aside. Place the
Building Site for a Bridge
remaining number tokens in alphabetical order, just as in
the set-up of Catan base game. Finally, place number token
“2” (B) on the hex with number token “12” (H). Now
that hex produces resources whenever a “2” or a “12” is
rolled.
• Place the robber on one of the two swampland hexes.
• Place the coins beside the game board. At this point, none
additional Rules
of the players have coins. Settlements and Roads Adjacent to the River
• Take the 3 bridges of your color. As in the set-up phase, you receive 1 coin for each road and
• Place the “Wealthiest Settler” and “Poor Settler” tiles beside each settlement that you build adjacent to a river hex. However,
the game board. you do not receive any coins for a settlement adjacent to a river
hex being upgraded to a city.
set-up
Building Bridges
Each player builds 2 settlements with 1 road each, as is
Building a bridge requires 2 brick
customary in the Catan base game. The following rules apply:
and 1 lumber. A new bridge must
• You may not build a road on any of the “building sites” for
always connect to 1 of your existing
the bridges—a building site is a path (see dotted lines) roads, settlements, or cities. A bridge
that crosses a river. This rule applies during the whole
can only be built on one of the 7 game.
building sites for bridges—a building
• For each settlement you build adjacent to 1 or 2 river
site is a path that crosses a river. For
hexes, you receive 1 coin.
each bridge you build, you receive 3 coins. For the Longest
• For each road you build on a path adjacent to a river hex, Road and settlement building, a bridge is treated as if it were
you receive 1 coin. a road. You can only build 3 bridges. You may not use the
“Poor Settler” & “Wealthiest Settler” Tiles development card “Road Building” to build a bridge instead of
a road.
You can start the game with up to 4 coins. If you have the
smallest number of coins, you receive one of the “Poor Settler” Poor Settler Tiles
tiles (minus 2 victory points). If multiple players are tied for the If you have the smallest number of coins
smallest number of coins (even 0 coins), each of those players at any point in the game, you receive one
receives a Poor Settler tile (minus 2 victory points). of the Poor Settler tiles (minus 2 victory
If you and you alone have the most coins, you receive the points). If multiple players are tied for the
“Wealthiest Settler” tile. This tile is worth 1 victory point. smallest number of coins, each of those players receives a Poor
Settler tile. As soon as you no longer have the smallest number
the Game
of coins, you return your Poor Settler tile to the supply. When
The normal rules for Catan apply. The changes are described you have this tile, your number of victory points is reduced by 2.
below.
1111
HbmG nataC 5102 ©
=
HbmG nataC 5102 ©
HbmG nataC 5102 ©
Wealthiest Settler Tile TTHHEE CCAARRAAVVAANNSS
This special tile is worth 1 victory point.
Recently, Catan has been enjoying steadily growing wealth,
Initially, you receive the Wealthiest Settler
thanks to its industrious settlers, fishermen, and merchants.
tile by being the only player to have the most coins. If you hold
But not all of the settlers are satisfied. For some, Catan has
the Wealthiest Settler tile, you lose it if another player’s number
become too busy and agitated. To get away from the hustle
of coins equals or exceeds your number of coins. This can
happen due to you spending coins or due to another player and bustle, they drive the robber from the desert and settle
receiving coins. When you lose the tile, one of two things could at a small oasis. Now they have some peace and quiet, while
happen: enjoying the clean and dry desert air—but soon the diet is
lacking variety, and the wool necessary to make new clothes
• If a player is the only player with the most coins, that player
becomes scarce…
receives the Wealthiest Settler tile and the associated victory
point.
Duration of the Game: About 60 minutes
• Otherwise, the tile is set aside until there is only one player
Additional Components: See illustration below
with the most coins.
Gold Coins
Up to two times during your turn, you may spend 2 gold
coins to buy 1 resource card of your choice from the supply.
You can spend coins the turn you receive them. You may trade
gold for resource cards with other players (and vice versa). You
may use maritime trade to obtain coins at the usual 4 identical
resources for 1 coin (or 3 for 1 if you have a 3:1 harbor). A 2:1
harbor can’t help, since there are no 2:1 gold harbors. Coins
cannot be stolen by the robber. Coins cannot be taken by using
a “Monopoly” development card.
1 oasis hex 22 camels
endinG the Game
The game ends when a player reaches 10 VPs during
their turn. What it is about
Nomads have settled at the oasis. They are in dire need of
tips FoR playinG this sCenaRio
wool and grain, and they offer commodities of the desert in
If you receive the Poor Settler tile, your chances of winning
exchange. Since the settlers of Catan can always spare some
the game are greatly reduced. Therefore, you should use your
sheep and grain, the nomads are sending out camels to
coins to buy resources only when you still have enough options
transport those coveted resources. Three caravans are formed
to build at the river and thus replenish your own gold reserves.
during the course of the game—each caravan consists of
Combination With VaRiants a string of camels that begins at the oasis. Each settlement
This scenario can be combined with any of this expansion’s and city adjacent to a caravan route is worth an extra victory
variants. point. Each road running parallel to a caravan counts double
(important for determining the Longest Road).
For combination with “Catan for Two”
• When you build a settlement adjacent to a swampland hex, pRepaRation
you receive 2 trade tokens.
The oasis hex replaces the desert. Place the oasis hex
• Instead of sending the robber to the desert (which does not
at the very center of the island before creating
exist in this scenario), it is sent to a swampland hex.
Catan—the orientation of the oasis is
For combination with “Catan Event Cards” arbitrary. Place the camels beside the
• Robber Flees: The robber is placed beside the game game board. Place the robber beside
board until it is used again (via a “7” or the use of a the game board; as soon as the first
knight card). “7” is rolled, place it on any
When combined with the “Harbormaster” variant, this hex with a number token
scenario should be played until a player reaches 11 victory (not on the oasis).
points during their turn.
1122
the Game • If there is still an open caravan starting point, you may
place a camel there to start a new caravan.
The normal rules for Catan apply. The changes are
described below. • It is not possible for a caravan to branch. For each caravan,
there will always be 2 or fewer paths on which to place a
additional Rules new camel. There are only 3 caravans, so there will be a
If, after set-up, you build any settlements or upgrade any maximum of 6 possible paths on which a camel may be
settlements to cities during your turn, 1 camel is placed after placed during any given turn. The players vote on where
you finish your turn. However, you do not necessarily choose each camel is placed.
where to place the camel; instead its exact placement is Example 2: The camel has been placed on position “A.” Now
determined in a voting round (see below). there are 4 paths where the next camel may be placed.
Placing a Camel
During play, 3 different caravans develop and extend—each
starts at the oasis and consists of a string of camels.
• You must always place a camel on a path. That path must
not already be occupied by another camel, but it may be
occupied by a road. You may also build a road on a path AA
occupied by a camel. Place any road and camel on the
same path side by side.
• Each camel has a “front” end (the head).
• You must place the first camel of a caravan on a path
directly pointed to by one of the 3 arrows on the oasis hex
(see example 1)—the camel’s front must point away from
that arrow. Each caravan’s first camel starts from a
different arrow.
Example 1: The first camel must be placed. There are Voting Round
3 paths on which it may be placed.
During a voting round, you get to bid once to determine how
many votes you have to influence the placement of a camel.
Bidding starts with the player who just finished their turn and
proceeds clockwise. You bid by placing wool and/or grain
resource cards face up in front of yourself. Only players who
have bid at least one card can negotiate with each other to
determine where to place the camel.
• You have one vote for each card that you bid.
• If you have more votes than all of the other players
combined, you choose where to place the camel.
• Otherwise, if 2 or more players combined have the majority
of the votes and they agree on the placement of the camel,
they place the camel accordingly.
• Otherwise (no agreement is reached), the player who has
the most votes chooses where to place the camel (even if
this player is a minority of the total votes).
• You must place each of the second and latter camels of
• Otherwise (there is no “most votes” player), the player who
a caravan on a path in such a way that the new camel is
just finished their turn chooses where to place the camel
adjacent to the “front” of the last previously placed camel
(even if that player has no votes).
in its caravan (see example). The new camel’s front must
• Finally, all players discard their resources used for voting.
also point away from the last previously placed camel in
Note: Each player is offered only one opportunity to vote.
its caravan.
Adding more bidding cards to the first offer later on is
not allowed.
1133
speCial Cases tips FoR playinG this sCenaRio
End of a Caravan In the Catan base game, wool is usually the resource
considered least important. In this scenario, wool takes on a
A caravan ends when it can no longer be extended by adding
greater significance—wool is used for votes that affect camel
a camel. In addition, when the camel supply is depleted, all 3
placement, which can lead to additional victory points. Grain is
caravans end.
also used for votes, but for building it can be more useful than
Merging of 2 Caravans wool. So it is often a good idea to place a settlement adjacent or
Two caravans meeting at an intersection merge as soon as the close to a productive pasture hex during set-up.
next camel is placed and will continue as a single caravan.
Combination With VaRiants
Camels on the Coast and at the Oasis
You can combine this scenario with any of this expansion’s
A caravan may be extended by placing a camel on an
variants.
appropriate coastal path.
For combination with “Catan for Two”
A caravan’s first camel may not be placed on a path along the
Each voting round determines the placement of 2 camels:
edge of the oasis hex. However, if a caravan finds its way back to
the oasis, a camel may be placed on a path along the edge of the • If you win the vote, you place 2 camels. However, you must
oasis hex. extend 2 different caravans.
• In case of a tie, each player places a camel—first the
Benefits of Caravans
player who just finished their turn and then the other
• Longest Road — A road on the same path as a camel
player.
counts as 2 roads for the Longest Road. For example,
• Instead of sending the robber to the desert, it is placed
if a player has 4 continuous road segments and 2 of those
beside the game board until it is used again (via a “7” or
road segments are on the same paths as camels, it would
the use of a knight card).
count as road with a length of “6.” This would fulfill
the requirement of a length of at least “5” for the initial For combination with “Catan Event Cards”
Longest Road. • Robber Flees: Place the robber beside the board until it is
• Increase in value of cities and settlements — Each used again (via a “7” or the use of a knight card).
settlement or city located between 2 camels is worth When combined with the “Harbormaster” variant, this
1 additional victory point. scenario should be played until one player reaches 13 VPs
Example 3: (see the illustration) During the course of during their turn.
the game, 3 somewhat longer caravans have
developed. A settlement of player “White” and 2
settlements of player “Blue” are each
worth 1 additional victory point—because
each is located between two camels. Moreover,
3 roads of player “Blue” and one road of player
“White” count double for the Longest Road.
There are currently 6 paths on which a camel
can be placed.
endinG the Game
The game ends when a player reaches
12 victory points during their turn.
1144
BBAARRBBAARRIIAANN AATTTTAACCKK
Catan’s wealth doesn’t go unnoticed. Fearsome
barbarians, eager for booty, are landing on the coasts of
Catan, spreading terror. The fun is over—the peaceful
times are history! One never knows where the barbarians
will strike. Initially, there are only a few raiders, but their
numbers increase rapidly. At first they only ruin resource
production. As their strength grows, however, they threaten
to besiege settlements and cities—with devastating
consequences.
But Catanians stand by each other. They respond by
training knights to send into battle—but will they be
strong enough?
Duration of the Game: About 60-90 minutes
Additional Components: See illustration below
• Place the inner terrain hexes: Randomly place the
following hexes in the white inner area: 1 forest, 1 pasture, 1
hills, 2 mountains, and 2 fields. One forest hex is not used.
40 gold coins • Placing number tokens: After placing the hexes, place
the number tokens following the pattern shown below.
• Take the 6 knights of your color.
• Place a barbarian on the hex with the “2” number token
and on the hex with the “12.” The remaining barbarians
are placed beside the game board.
SWIFT KNIGHT
• Use the new 26 development cards that this expansion
provides for this scenario. Do not use any of the Catan
HbmG nataC 5102 © Tho oY ca n c o t u u p a p a mp iteh aa d t y h mb p y o u l fa as t yc n oe no u ot 1 h r t k ea c r nh l r i k o e g n i a hc id te g y ! h bt.e Rdeecpkla wceb it htha teR h bi b sa a nsee R wgia a dme nev e da loet pvem tloa epn Cmt K ceanrtd c daredc k. base game development cards.
• Do not use the “Largest Army” special card.
• Do not use the robber.
What it is about
Eager for booty, the barbarians are landing on the shores
of Catan. At first, their mere presence spreads fear and terror.
But as more and more barbarians cross the ocean, they begin
to occupy coastal hexes and block resource production. The •• 33 •• •• 88 ••••••••
barbarians even threaten to capture coastal settlements and
cities. To survive, the Catanians must prepare their knights at 99 44 55 1100
•••••••• •••••• •••••••• ••••••
the castle and—demonstrating never before seen unity—send
them into battle against the barbarian hordes. 1122 66 1100 88 1111
•• •••••••••• •••••• •••••••••• ••••
pRepaRation
44 99 33 55
• Place the outer terrain hexes: First, place the desert •••••• •••••••• •••• ••••••••
hex and the castle hex as shown at the top of the next
column. Randomly place the following hexes in the gray 66 22
•••••••••• ••
outer circle: 2 forest, 2 hills, 3 pasture, 1 mountains, and
2 fields. These hexes are “coastal hexes.”
1155
HbmG nataC 5102 ©
Desert Hex
Castle Hex
24 knights
(6 of each 30 barbarians
color)
TREASON INTRIGUE KNIGHTHOOD
HbmG nataC 5102 © 2 I b f a t Y u i r h a n ob n e n o ua rp cd f r e o l o i at pn a a h b y ln r q t , a e e a u s mt c n a i eefn ’k r r t f t o e e r 2 h e d m o en e g mi mc o o t 2 o hu l t a d od eg h s . r ni h e t f R a 1 f 2 s b e l e u r oa m hoe prr te n b p o h b x t a l v © e 2 o 0 1 e 5y Cata eh nr G r m . b s tHi h e . t a h x on e i a sn s s I n f f ct rd ht a o h er amR e d d cr e d oe a am an a ih s t o d r t ev t e ad oxe ln r yo1 ha o of we b u b y x a a ro ae r rs u p b n b, r r a de a icr w s ir i s ho i a ca n o on an n ie r c s r ed e s . ! © 2015 Catan GmbHT t oh h ca e ct P u 6 p l p a a p i c et a h e d t h 1 mb s y k u o a n s f nt it gh on h t e oh t t c e o a a r n l s kr t1 e l n e a o i dg hf yh e x tb. ! e
card back 26 development cards cover card
set-up • You may not build a road on a path adjacent to a
conquered hex, and you may not build a settlement on an
Set up as outlined in the Catan base game, except that your
intersection adjacent to a conquered hex.
second settlement is replaced by a city. You still only receive 1
resource for each terrain hex adjacent to your city. c) A settlement or city is conquered
As soon as a city or settlement is not adjacent to an
the Game
unconquered hex (i.e., it is surrounded only by the frame and/
The normal rules for Catan apply. The changes are described or conquered hexes), it becomes a “conquered settlement/city.”
below. Turn the conquered settlement/city on its side, but leave it on its
intersection.
additional Rules
• You get no victory points for a conquered settlement/city.
In addition to rolling for production, trading, and building,
• If a conquered settlement/city has a harbor, you cannot
you may also resolve the following actions during your turn:
use it.
1. Barbarians land in Catan (each time you build a settlement
• Since the desert hex and the castle hex can never be
or upgrade a settlement to a city)
conquered, a settlement or city adjacent to one of these
2. Immediately play a development card (each time you buy a
hexes cannot be conquered.
development card)
Example: A barbarian attack occurs; you roll and place
3. Place a knight (each time you play a “Knighthood” or a
barbarians:
“Swift Knight” development card)
• You roll a “3” and place a barbarian on the coastal hex
4. Move your knights (at the end of your turn, after you finish with the “3” (A).
trading and building)
• You roll a “9” and place a barbarian on the coastal hex
5. Expel the barbarians (at the end of your turn, after moving with the “9” (B). Now 3 barbarians are on the hex, and it
your knights) is conquered. The hex’s number token is turned face down.
1. Barbarians land on Catan The red settlement is also conquered, because there are no
unconquered hexes adjacent to it—it is turned on its side.
a) Barbarian attack
• You roll a “3”. Since a “3” has already been rolled, you re-
Each time you build a settlement or upgrade a settlement to
roll the dice.
a city, you must immediately interrupt your turn and resolve
• You roll an “8”. However, the coastal hex with the “8” has
a “barbarian attack.” If there are no barbarians left in the
already been conquered (the number token is turned face
supply, all of the barbarians have landed on Catan and no more
down), so no barbarian is placed.
barbarian attacks take place. Attacks proceed as follows:
Thus, you have rolled 3 different non-“7” numbers and
• Roll the dice until you get a result that is not a “7” (re-roll
placed 2 barbarians during the process.
as many time as needed). Then place a barbarian on the
coastal hex with the number token corresponding to the
dice roll result. If this coastal hex already has 3 barbarians,
do not place a barbarian (do not re-roll the dice).
AA
• Roll the dice until you get a result that is not a “7” and is
CC
not the same as the first dice roll result. Then use this dice
roll result to place a barbarian as outlined in step 1.
BB
• Roll the dice until you get a result that is not a “7” and is
not the same as either of the first two dice roll results. Then
use this dice roll result to place a barbarian as outlined in
step 1.
b) Coastal hex is conquered
As soon as you have placed 3 barbarians on a coastal hex,
turn that hex’s number token face down.
• This “conquered hex” no longer produces resources when
you roll its number. You no longer place barbarians on this
hex during a barbarian attack.
1166
2. Immediately play a development card b) Resolving a victory
When you buy a development card, you must immediately When a victory occurs in a hex, the defeated barbarians on
reveal and resolve it. On your turn, you may buy any number of the coastal hex become “prisoners.” These barbarian prisoners
development cards, but you must reveal and resolve each such are distributed among the “involved” players (i.e., the players
card before buying another development card. Discard each who have “involved” knights adjacent to the hex):
development card after it is resolved. If the development card • If you are the only involved player, you receive all the
stack is depleted, shuffle the discard pile and it becomes the prisoners.
new development card stack.
• If multiple players are involved, each of the involved players
3. Place a knight gets a prisoner. If there are not enough prisoners to go
around, each involved player rolls the dice.
When you play a
Each of the involved players who rolls highest (re-roll ties)
“Knighthood” development
receives a prisoner. If you roll and don’t receive a prisoner,
card, place one of your
you receive 3 gold as compensation.
knights on 1 of the 6 paths
adjacent to the castle hex. • If each involved player receives a prisoner and a prisoner
That path must not already is left over, the player who has the most involved knights
be occupied by another receives the prisoner. Should there be a tie for involved
knight. Similarly, when knights, each involved player rolls the dice (re-roll ties).
you play a “Swift Knight” The high roller gets the prisoner; the loser receives 3 gold.
development card, place Each two prisoners you hold are worth 1 victory point.
1 of your knights on any Example: Red moves her knight a total of 3 paths, to a path
path not occupied by another knight. adjacent to the conquered hex (A). 4 knights are thus pitted
against 3 barbarians. The knights are victorious. The two
4. Move your knights
players involved in the victory (red and blue) each get one
After you finish trading and building on your turn, you may
barbarian prisoner. Red has more knights involved in the
move each of your knights. You move a knight from path to
victory, so she gets the third prisoner.
adjacent path.
• You may move each knight up to 3 paths. If you pay 1 grain,
you may move the knight up to 5 paths (instead of 3 paths).
If you want to increase the movement of several knights to
5 paths, you must pay 1 grain for each of these knights.
• When you move a knight, ignore all other knights, roads,
settlements, and cities. However, none of your knights can
end its movement on a path occupied by another knight
(yours or another player’s).
• After you finish moving your knights, none of them may be
on a path adjacent to the castle hex. AA
5. Expel the barbarians
a) Checking for victories
At the end of your turn, after moving your knights, check each
coastal hex to see if a victory occurs in that hex. Start checking
with the coastal hex numbered “4” (which is to the left of the
c) Reconquered coastal hexes
castle hex) and continue in clockwise direction until all of the
When a victory occurs at a conquered coastal hex, turn the
coastal hexes are checked.
hex’s number token face up and turn upright any adjacent
For a given hex, victory occurs if there is at least 1 barbarian
conquered settlements and cities. The hex can once again
on the hex and there are more knights on the hex’s 6 adjacent
produce resources, and those settlements/cities are once again
paths than barbarians on the hex.
fully functional (e.g., worth victory points). On the other hand,
barbarian attacks can once again affect the hex.
1177
Example: The red settlement (A) regains its function, and A “7” is rolled for production
the number token (B) is turned face up again.
If you roll a “7” for production, you may draw 1 random
resource card from a player of your choice. In addition, each
player who has more than 7 resource cards must select half
(rounded down) of their resource cards and return them to
AA the bank.
Gold Coins
The large gold coins are worth 5,
while the small ones are worth 1.
Up to two times during your turn,
you may buy a resource of your choice
for 2 gold. You may trade gold for
resource cards with other players (and
vice versa). You may use maritime
trade to obtain coins at the usual
4 identical resources for 1 coin (or
3 for 1 if you have a 3:1 harbor). A 2:1
d) Knight losses after a victory
harbor can’t help, since there are no 2:1 gold harbors.
After each victory, one of the involved players rolls a die
Gold does not count as a resource and is thus not considered
and places it in the center of the castle hex. The number
when a “7” is rolled. Gold cannot be taken by using a
rolled determines one of the three “orientation” pairs of paths
“Monopoly” development card.
adjacent to the castle hex: “1&4s,” “2&5l,” or “3&6n.”
Check each knight involved in the victory. If the path that the The events “Treason” and “Intrigue”
knight is on has the same orientation as one of the two paths When one of these events is resolved, barbarians are
determined by the die roll, remove that knight from the board removed from certain coastal hexes and/or placed on other
(return to supply). For each of your knights removed, you coastal hexes. A barbarian may not be moved to a hex that
receive 3 gold as compensation. already contains 3 barbarians. If a barbarian is removed from
Example: After a victory, a die is rolled to determine which a conquered hex (i.e., from a hex occupied by 3 barbarians),
knight(s) will be removed. The “3&6n” orientation is rolled. turn the hex’s number token face up and turn upright any
A red knight and a blue knight are on paths that have the adjacent conquered settlements and cities. The hex can once
“2&5n” orientation. The owners of the knights put them again produces resources, and those settlements/cities are once
back into their supplies, and each receives 3 gold. again fully functional.
endinG the Game
The game ends as soon as a player reaches 12 victory points
during their turn.
1188
HbmG
nataC
5102
©
INTRIGUE
Remove 1 barbarian
from a hex of your choice
and add it to your prisoners!
If there are no barbarians
on the coastal hexes, discard
this card and draw a new one.
HbmG
nataC
5102
©
BB
= 5
= 1
TREASON
You obtain 2 gold. Remove
2 barbarians from 2 different hexes
and place them on 2 other
unconquered coastal hexes.
If there aren’t enough barbarians
in play, take either 1 or both
of them from the supply.
tips FoR playinG this sCenaRio TTRRAADDEERRSS && BBAARRBBAARRIIAANNSS
To come out as winner in this scenario, it is important to
The barbarians have been driven off, and peace is
build knights. On the one hand, you need knights to drive
returning. The destruction the barbarians left in their wake
barbarians off the hexes adjacent to your own settlements or
is being repaired as fast as possible. The castle where the
cities. On the other hand, you can use knights to take prisoners
Council of Catan holds session suffered particularly severe
that increase your victory point total. Since mostly it will not be
damage, but the restoration efforts are making real progress.
possible to win victories alone, you should cooperate and ally
Now, the craftsmen need to finish the stained glass windows
with other players—preferably with those who are not too close
and the new marble statues. Marble must be transported
to victory.
from the quarry, sand must be brought to the glassworks,
Combination With VaRiants: glass must be delivered to the Castle, and tools are needed as
This scenario can be combined with any of this expansion’s well.
variants. The roads of Catan are bustling with traffic. Of course you
are involved; the Council pays for transport in solid gold.
For combination with “Catan for Two”
Only some scattered barbarians are getting in the way—
1. A knight of a neutral color takes part in the game as the
they’re waiting. For you!
“foreign knight” and may be freely used by both players.
Duration of the Game: About 90 minutes
When you build your first knight, you place the foreign
knight on a path adjacent to the castle hex. On your turn, Additional Components: See illustration below
you first move your own knight(s) and then the foreign
knight. Once on the board, the foreign knight remains on
the board; it is never removed after a victory.
2. When you build a settlement for yourself and then a
settlement for a neutral player, the barbarians attack
twice—first for your settlement, then for the neutral
settlement.
3. Since there is no robber, you may pay trade tokens to move
a barbarian. If your victory point total is fewer than or
equal to your opponent’s total, you must pay 1 trade token.
Otherwise, it costs you 2 trade tokens.
4. After a victory, if required, use a default dice roll of “3” for
the foreign knight.
5. As compensation for removing a knight, you receive 2 gold
and a trade token instead of 3 gold.
For combination with “Catan Event Cards”
4 wagons 30 barbarians 40 gold coins
There are no knight cards and no robber in this scenario.
Thus, the following events have different meanings:
• Robber Attacks!: The player whose turn it is may draw
one random resource card from a player of their choice. In
addition, each player who has more than 7 resource cards must select half (rounded down) of their resource cards
and return them to the bank. Cover card
20 baggage train
• Robber Flees: Since there is no robber, this event does cards (5 per player)
not take place.
QUARRY • Conflict: If one player alone owns the most knights on the
board, that player chooses 1 opponent and takes a random
Wh r e e n so c u o r m ce b c in a e r d d w fr i o th m t h th e e “ m H . arbormaster” variant, this HbmG nataC 5102 © 1 tR V uert v i hn r e c ee ai q fl n t , u t uw o h irmii e ts r h db c y ef ia ro tr, r o dy P fv oo ipu c n o ot r oi ye i nr oa y n t u .sc rh t ! Rdeecpk tla wcRei a t hthd teh e bi R sa nssee w &ga dm e beve adlo Repvbemlaoe Rpnmt i c aeann rtd sc daredc k.
scenario should be played until one player reaches 13 victory
points during their turn.
1199
HbmG nataC 5102 ©
7 5 HbmG nataC 5102 © X
KNIGHTROAD BUILDINGSWIFT JOURNEY TOOLMAKIN G G LASSMAKING
© 2015 Catan GmbHfro If m a dy Mn r oat oo u hw vt e he p 1 e o l 1 a r wr c b e r n e o s a eo a i r r tu bd o or a o ncf r r e i t Hbm G a a na h taC 5102 p © c n e a ar o t rr tho da oyP . d aol, dua . c hea 2d njuewst rb Hb o mG nataC 5102 © uaidlts t I m ah fw se y a y am oi no fgu n. u o e h r nr a ,w i vnya © e 201 o 5 Cat an gGmb H tu mh o n em o vr aaee1 gygd a t uu mR it y r V rh l n e e o naov eq. ui er v u in a c f r e i ,u l r w t em th d i o tb ih f s eo r r ci r ta y o, v r fy i d c op P t ou © 2015 Coatan G o mbHn ir r o ny ey .tao s i c 1 u n hr t Rtu V t !er rhnv e i e e q c ia nu fl, u t i wt rm h o e i d itb sh r fe c o ir y at r ,r o v yd fi P o cp ou to n o o ir rn ye y i o ta .s u n c hr t!
Card back 26 development cards Cover card
HbmG nataC 5102 ©
2 sea frame pieces
(replace frame pieces
labeled 1-2 and 5-6
36 commodity tokens
Token backs Token fronts
© 2015 Catan GmbH 4 1 HbmG nataC 5102 © 5 © 2015 Catan GmbH 2 X 6 X 3 © 2015 Catan GmbH 7 X 4 UseP ltahc bee sa teh Gte oG mf a 5fa G cc eaer udt ps Rtihn aa fti r nmon at Ct coha f y Ryood uurrs s ceolfl.or.
Card back
What it is about pRepaRation
The Castle is being restored, so it will shine in new • First, assemble the frame. Replace 2 frame pieces from
splendor. For this purpose, glass panes for the leaded basic Catan (labeled 1–2 and 5–6) with the corresponding
windows are needed, along with marble for statues and frame pieces provided in this expansion.
interior decoration. The players have the task of transporting • Then place the 3 trade hexes as shown in the illustration
glass and marble to the castle hex as well as providing the below. The sea side of each trade hex must match up with
glassworks with sand and the marble quarry with tools. Each a sea side of the frame. Do not use the following 3 hexes
transported commodity is rewarded with gold and counts as from the Catan base game: the desert hex, 1 pasture hex,
a victory point. The first player to reach a total of 13 victory and 1 fields hex. Remove those 3 hexes from play.
points during their turn wins the game.
• Do not place number tokens on the 3 trade hexes—
remove the “2” and the “12” number tokens from play.
There are three new terrain hexes that serve as “trade
Place the remaining number tokens as specified in the
hexes” for the transport of commodities.
set-up of the Catan base game, leaving out token “2” (B)
and token “12” (H). When placing the number tokens,
skip the trade hexes.
Castle Hex • Arrange the commodity tokens into 3 stacks sorted by the
For restoration, pictures on their backs (castle, quarry, glassworks). Shuffle
the castle needs each stack and place it with the backs facing up (showing
marble and glass. the picture of a building) beside the corresponding trade
It provides tools hex (see arrows in the illustration below).
(from its smithy)
and sand (from
its shore).
X
Quarry Hex
The marble
quarry needs
tools. It provides X
marble as well
as sand (from its
shore).
Glassworks Hex • You receive the set of 5 baggage train cards whose frame
The glassworks colors match your color. Stack the cards face down, sorted
needs sand. It so that the backs of the
provides glass cards are in sequence from
and tools (from 1 to 5. Turn the top (1)
its smithy). baggage train card of your
stack face up and place
it next to the stack (see
illustration)—this is your
active baggage train card.
2200
X
4 1
HbmG
nataC
5102 ©
• Place the 3 barbarians on the paths marked with black moVement
crosses in the illustration below.
After you finish trading and building during your turn, you
• Use the new 25 development cards that this expansion may move your wagon. The following rules apply:
provides for this scenario. Do not use any of the Catan
1. Moving your wagon
base game development cards.
• You receive 5 gold. • You move your wagon along paths from intersection to
• Do not use the “Longest Road” special card. adjacent intersection. Moving your wagon along a path
from one intersection to an adjacent intersection costs 1 or
• Do not use the robber.
more “movement points” (MPs).
set-up
• Any number of wagons may occupy a given intersection.
You set up as outlined in the Catan base game, except that • At the beginning of the game, your wagon has 4 movement
your second settlement is replaced by a city. You still only points to use each time you take your turn. You can
increase its MPs by upgrading your baggage train.
receive 1 resource for each terrain hex adjacent to your city.
• When you move your wagon along a path, the movement
Once you have built your city, place your wagon next to it—
point (MP) cost varies based upon whether or not the path
your wagon is on your city’s intersection.
is occupied by a road and/or a barbarian:
the Game – The MP cost is 2 if the path does not have a road.
– The MP cost is 1 if the path has one of your own roads.
The normal rules for Catan apply. The changes are described
– The MP cost is 1 if the path has another player’s road, but
below.
you must also pay 1 gold to that player.
tRade hexes – The MP cost is increased by an additional +2 if there is a
barbarian on the path (see also section 5a).
Each of the 3 trade hexes has a “central plaza” intersection—
Example: The red wagon has 4 movement points. It can
with a building. Four “interior” paths lead to this central plaza.
move (A) to the castle using 4 red roads (4 MPs). Or, it can
For each trade hex, the following rules apply:
move (B) to the castle using a roadless path (2 MPs) and 2
• You may build roads on interior paths, according to the blue roads (2 MPs), but would owe blue 2 coins. Or, the red
usual rules. wagon can move (C) to the red settlement using 2 red roads
• You may not build a settlement on the central plaza (2 MPs) with a barbarian (+2 MPs).
intersection of a trade hex (A).
• You may not build roads on the three paths of a trade hex 11 11
(B) that border on the sea. AA 11 33
CC
• You may build settlements/cities on the 4 land corners
(intersections) of a trade hex; obeying the distance rule. 11 BB 22
Example: The blue player and the red player have built roads
on three out of four paths of the trade hex. No settlement
11 11
may be built on the central intersection (A), and no road
may be built on the 3 paths (B) of the trade hex’s coast. 11
BB
BB
• On your turn, you may pay 1 (and only 1) grain to increase
your wagon’s movement points by +2 for the current turn.
BB You may do so even after already having used some or all of
its MPs in the regular fashion.
• Your wagon may stop and end its movement on any
AA
intersection it moves to. Unused movement points are lost.
• Your wagon must stop and end its movement whenever it
moves onto the central plaza of a trade hex.
• If you do not have enough unused MPs to move along a
path, you may not partially move along the path—your
wagon must end its movement on an intersection.
2211
2. Choosing an initial destination trade hex 3. Delivering your commodity
When you first move your wagon, you should choose one When your wagon stops at the central plaza of the trade hex
of the 3 trade hexes to move towards (your wagon’s initial corresponding to your commodity token, you must deliver that
destination). You may change your initial destination at will. commodity:
When your wagon eventually reaches the central plaza of • Turn the commodity token face down (showing a picture of
this trade hex, you don’t receive any gold—you don’t have a a building). The token is worth 1 victory point.
commodity token to deliver. However, you do receive the top • Depending on your baggage train (see below), you also
commodity token from the stack corresponding to the trade receive between 1 and 5 gold.
hex. Turn it face up in front of yourself to reveal the commodity • Take and reveal another commodity token as outlined
depicted on the front of the token. There are 4 different above—this commodity token determines your new
commodities: destination trade hex.
4. Upgrading your baggage train
Commodity tokens
Your wagon represents the on-board location of your baggage
train. The characteristics of your baggage train are detailed on
your active (face up) baggage train card:
• Your wagon’s movement points.
Glass Marble Sand Tools
• The gold you receive for
delivering a commodity.
Each trade hex produces two different types of commodities.
• The roll required to drive off a
Glassworks hex Quarry hex Castle hex barbarian (see below). 5 2
X Example: Your active baggage
train card is shown here. You
have 5 movement points for your wagon (A), you receive 2
gold when delivering a commodity (B), and you drive off a
barbarian by rolling a “6” (C).
During trading and building on your turn, you may pay
resources to upgrade to your next baggage train card:
• Pay the resources shown on the top card of your baggage
Commodity tokens produced at each trade hex
train stack.
• Turn the top card of that stack over and place it on top of
On later turns, you must move your wagon to the trade hex
your active baggage train card. This card is now your active
where this commodity can be delivered. You want to deliver
baggage train card.
glass and marble to the castle hex, tools to the quarry hex, and
• Upgrading to the last baggage train card in your stack is
sand to the glassworks hex. For example, if your wagon is on
worth 1 victory point, as indicated on that card.
the glassworks hex and you have received a glass commodity
5. The barbarians
token, you must
move your wagon Barbarians can occupy paths with roads and paths
to the castle trade without roads. Only 1 barbarian may occupy a given road or
hex. path. You are allowed to build a road on a path occupied by
a barbarian.
A player may
carry out only a) Moving past barbarians
one delivery at a When moving your wagon along a path (road or no road)
time. Only after occupied by a barbarian, your movement point (MP) cost is
completing a 2 more than normally required (i.e., roadless-path + barbarian
delivery may you = 4 MPs; road-path + barbarian = 3 MPs). If you do not have
draw another sufficient movement points to move past a barbarian, you either
stop on the intersection before the barbarian and lose any
commodity token.
unused MPs or move in another direction.
2222
HbmG nataC 5102 ©
AA
BB
CC
b) Driving off a barbarian tips FoR playinG this sCenaRio
If you upgrade your baggage train card at least once, you can Road building is very important, even though in this scenario
attempt to drive off a barbarian: no Special victory points are obtained for the “Longest Road.”
• Pause your moving wagon on an intersection adjacent to a The more roads you have, the faster you can move your
barbarian. wagon from one trade hex to another and the less gold you have
• Roll one die. to pay for using your opponents’ roads.
• If the result is one of the die roll numbers shown on your Always make sure that you have enough gold reserves.
active baggage train card, you may move the barbarian to Otherwise you might find yourself sitting with your wagon
any path or road not already occupied by a barbarian. between other players’ roads and not being able to move on
• Regardless of whether you drive off the barbarian, you may without gold. Then, if none of your fellow players pays you gold
continue moving your wagon normally using any remaining for using your roads, your only option left would be to obtain
movement points. When you drive off a barbarian, you do gold from trading—with the other players or with the bank.
not steal a resource card from another player.
Combination With VaRiants
• During each of your turns, you may only attempt to drive off
This scenario can be combined with any of this
a given barbarian once.
expansion’s variants.
6. A “7” is rolled
For combination with “Catan for Two”
When you roll a “7” as your production roll, you must move
• Return to the bank half (round up) of the gold you pay for
one of the 3 barbarians to any path not already occupied by
the use of neutral roads when moving your wagon, and give
a barbarian. If you move a barbarian to a path occupied by a
the other half (round down) to you opponent.
road, you may draw a resource card (not gold) from the owner
of that road. • Since there is no robber, you may pay a trade token to
move a barbarian to a path not occupied by a road and/or
In addition, each player who has more than 7 resource cards
another barbarian—instead of sending the robber to
must select half (rounded down) of their resource cards and
the desert.
return them to the bank.
• When you build a settlement adjacent to a trade hex, you
7. A “2” or a “12” is rolled
take 1 trade token (also applies during the set-up phase).
When you roll a”2” or a “12” as your production roll, re-roll
For combination with “Catan Event Cards”
the dice.
There is no robber and no Longest Road in this scenario. The
8. Gold Coins
following events thus have a different meaning:
The large gold coins are worth 5, while the small ones are
• Robber Attacks!: When you roll a “7” as your production
worth 1.
roll, you must move one of the 3 barbarians to any path not
Gold is important—it is used to pay for the movement along already occupied by a barbarian. If you move a barbarian
other players’ roads. In addition, up to two times during your to a path occupied by a road, you may draw a resource
turn, you may buy a resource of your choice for 2 gold. You card (not gold) from the owner of that road. In addition,
may trade gold for resource cards with other players (and vice
each player who has more than 7 resource cards must
versa). You may use maritime trade to obtain coins at the
select half (rounded down) of their resource cards and
usual 4 identical resources for 1 coin (or 3 for 1 if you have a
return them to the bank.
3:1 harbor). A 2:1 harbor can’t help, since there are no
• Robber Flees: Since there is no robber, this event does
2:1 gold harbors.
not take place.
Gold does not count as a resource and is thus not considered
• Earthquake: It requires 2 movement points to move your
when a “7” is rolled. Gold cannot be taken by using a
wagon along a road that is turned sideways—the same as is
“Monopoly” development card.
required to move along a path without a road.
endinG the Game When combined with the “Harbormaster” variant, this
The game ends when a player has reached a total of 13 or scenario should be played until one player reaches 14 victory
more victory points during their turn. points during their turn.
2233
CREDITS CARD DECK MANIFEST
Design: Klaus Teuber (www.klausteuber.com) Catan Event Deck (38)
Original Development: TM-Spiele GmbH Rules Summary Card x1
Robber Attacks x6
5th Ed. Development Team: Pete Fenlon, Arnd Fischer,
Epidemic x2
Ron Magin, Benjamin Teuber, and Guido Teuber
Earthquake x1
Art: Michael Menzel, Harald Lieske Good Neighbors x1
Art Direction & Graphic Design: Pete Fenlon, Catan Prospers x16
Tournament x1
Michaela Kienle, and Ron Magin
Trade Advantage x1
Production: Ron Magin & Pete Fenlon
Calm Seas x2
Translation: Gavin Allister, Guido Teuber Robber Flees x2
Neighborly Assistance x2
Special Thanks: Caecilia Pomponia Attica (LSKC/39-6),
Conflict x1
Robert T. Carty, Jr., Coleman Charlton, Morgan Dontanville,
Plentiful Year x1
Chris Funk, Alex Colón Hernández, Stephanie Newman, Donna
New Year x1
Prior, and Kelli Schmitz.
Fishermen of Catan Deck
Original English Language Development: Guido Teuber, Coleman
Cover Card x1
Charlton, Pete Fenlon, and Alex Yeager
Rules Summary Card x4
Rule testing and advice during the expansion development:
Barbarian Attack Development Card Deck (27)
TM Spiele GmbH with: Reiner Müller, Wolfgang Lüdtke, Peter
Cover Card x1
Neugebauer, and Fritz Gruber
Treason x4
Catan GmbH with: Claudia Teuber, Guido Teuber, Benjamin Teuber,
Intrigue x4
Arnd Beenen, Oliver & Petra Sack with With Katharina Sack, Yannick
Knighthood x14
Sack, Michael Pfundstein, Frank Wölfelschneider with With Daniela
Swift Knight x4
Wölfelschneider, Daniela Reisser, Thomas Reisser, Xavi Bühlmann
with Jonas Bühlmann, Nina Bühlmann, Anja Gschwind, Oliver Traders & Barbarians Development Card Deck (26)
Lehmann, Daniel Stehli with With Martin Gürber, Jochen Buscher, Cover Card x1
André Fleckner, Guiseppe Goffi, Dr. Reiner Düren with Anna Lebrato, Knight x15
Manuel Lebrato, Monika Lebrato, Arend Overhoff, Nils Overhoff, Dr. Road Building x3
Martina Fach-Overhoff, Dirk Blask with Sandra Blask, Ralf Blask, Swift Journey x3
Sabine Heinrich, Guido Heinrich, Dietmar Stadler with Sylvia and Toolmaking x1
Klaus Rustler, Heinz Penzel, Denis Neumann, Simon Löbe, Meike Glassmaking x1
and Julia Stadler, and Sebastian Rapp. Quarry x1
Copyright © 2020 Catan GmbH and Catan Studio. Catan, Traders & Barbarians Baggage Train Cards (21)
Catan–Traders & Barbarians, The Settlers of Catan, the “Catan Cover Card x1
Sun” logo, the “Glowing Yellow Sun” and “Catan Board” marks,
5 baggage train cards numbered 1-5 x1 set per player
and all marks herein are trademarks of Catan GmbH and are
You have purchased a game of the highest quality.
used under license by Catan Studio. Published by Catan Studio,
However, if you find any components missing
1995 W. County Rd. B2, Roseville, MN 55113.
or damaged, please visit:
Phone +1.651.639.1905.
www.catanstudio.com/parts
For all other inquiries, contact us at:
If you would like to
info@catanstudio.com
protect your cards in this
game, we recommend
Gamegenic card sleeves.
The badge here
indicates what style of
sleeves and the number
Studio
of packs required to
sleeve all of the cards in ™
this CATAN expansion. catanstudio.com catan.com
2244
