Progress brings
Develop progress and
Defend Predation
brings
Imagination ruination
and work Grain
Welcome to the CATAN® – Cities & Knights 5-6 Player Extension™! Now you’ll face even
more competition from your fellow leaders as you struggle to dominate the island of Catan!
Meanwhile, an even larger and more powerful horde of barbarians awaits the first sign
of weakness from the island’s feuding leaders. Will you rally the defenders of Catan, seize
the initiative in expanding and improving your land, and construct one of the three great
metropolises of Catan? Or will you instead be brushed aside by your covetous neighbors while
someone else seizes the glory of victory?
NOTE: This 2023 revision of CATAN – Cities & Knights 5-6 Player Extension has new
“paired player” rules that must be played with the 2023 edition of CATAN – 5-6 Player
Extension™. These rules replace the “special building phase” found in previous rules
versions. All 2023 5-6 player extension rules can be found online at catan.com for free.
GAME COMPONENTS
To use CATAN – Cities & Knights 5-6 Player Extension (aka Cities &
Knights 5-6), you need:
• CATAN
• CATAN 5-6 Player Extension™ (aka CATAN 5-6)
• CATAN – Cities & Knights™ (aka Cities & Knights)
This extension contains:
• 18 commodity cards:
– 6 coin cards
– 6 paper cards
– 6 cloth cards
• 2 “Defender of Catan” victory point (VP) cards
• 2 development flip charts
• Playing pieces in 2 colors (green and brown):
– 6 city walls, 3 of each color (square wooden tokens)
– 12 knights, 6 of each color (round wooden tokens)
• 1 sheet of knight labels
• 1 CATAN – Cities & Knights 5-6 Player Extension rules booklet
• Player 1 and player 2 paired player markers
11
Before you begin your first game, remove the game pieces from the tile sheet. Then apply
the adhesive labels to the knight tokens. Find instructions on using the labels in the Cities
& Knights “Almanac.”
ExtEnsion GamE RulEs
Except where noted below, Cities & Knights 5-6 uses the same rules as CATAN, Cities &
Knights, and CATAN 5-6.
These additional rules include:
• rules for assembling the larger board;
• rules for paired players; and
• rules about activating knights.
Assembling the Board
First, set up the frame, using all of the pieces from CATAN and CATAN 5-6—as outlined
in the CATAN 5-6 rulebook.
Second, place the “barbarian tile” with the movement squares for the barbarian ship
next to the frame. Then, construct the island following all of the rules in CATAN 5-6.
Third, distribute a set of pieces and flip charts to each player, as described in Cities &
Knights.
Place the robber in either desert, and place the barbarian raiding ship in the “barbarian
ship” space on the barbarian tile.
Creating the Supply
If you haven’t done so already, add the 25 resource cards from CATAN 5-6 to the cards
from CATAN to create the supply. Add the additional commodity cards from Cities & Knights
5-6 to the matching stacks from Cities & Knights.
22
New Rules for 5-6 Players
The paired player rules are explained in CATAN 5-6. This chart shows the updated
actions specific to Cities & Knights 5-6.
Player 1 Player 2
Roll for production (mandatory)
Trade with other players and the supply Trade with the supply only
Build Build
Activate, promote, and/or perform Activate, promote, and/or perform
actions with your knights actions with your knights
Improve cities with commodities Improve cities with commodities
Play any number of progress cards Play any number of progress cards
Activation of Knights
As in the Cities & Knights rules, a knight may not perform any actions on the turn that it
has been activated. A knight may be activated during the player 2 paired player turn. It is
then able to perform actions during the controlling player’s next turn.
33
CREdits
Design: Klaus Teuber
Art: Michael Menzel, James Graham Walsh, Pete Fenlon
Graphic Design: Pete Fenlon, Michaela Kienle, Ron Magin
Production: Ron Magin, Pete Fenlon, Az Sperry
Special Thanks: Brea Blankenfeld, Robert T. Carty, Jr., Sebastian Castro Casas, Coleman Charlton,
Morgan Dontanville, Chris Funk, Alex Colón Hernández, Stephanie Newman, Donna Prior,
Anne Reynolds, Kelli Schmitz
Original English Language Development: William Niebling, Guido Teuber, Coleman Charlton, Robert T. Carty Jr.,
William Niebling, Will Niebling, Alex Yeager, Larry Roznai, Nick Johnson, Pete Fenlon
With Thanks to: Arnd Beenen, Peter Bromley, Darwin Bromley, Ariel Butler, Coleman Charlton, Keywood Cheeves, Jason
O. Hawkins, Emily Johnson, Olivia Johnston, Wolfgang Lüdtke, Luc Mertens, Reiner Müller, Jessica Ney-Grimm, Schar
Niebling, David Platnick, Lou Rexing, Al Hassan Ibn Muhammad Al Wazzan (LSKC/212-55), Karl Roelofs, Bridget
Roznai, Loren Roznai, Benny Teuber, Claudia Teuber, Liam Teuber, Leif Teuber, Matthew Schwabel, Tom Smith, Mike
Strack, Karl Roelofs, H. Jean Vanaise, Trella Wilhite, Bill Wordelmann, Elaine Wordelmann, Ed Zavada, Gero Zahn, Alan
Roireau, and the late Scott Anderson.
Copyright © 2023 CATAN GmbH and CATAN Studio. CATAN, CATAN – 5-6 Player Extension, CATAN – Cities & Knights, CATAN
– Cities & Knights 5-6 Player Extension, The Settlers of Catan, the “Catan Sun” logo, the “Glowing Yellow Sun” and “CATAN
Board” marks, and all marks herein are trademarks of CATAN GmbH (catan.com) and are used under license by CATAN
Studio. Published by CATAN Studio, 1995 W. County Rd. B2, Roseville, MN 55113. Phone +1.651.639.1905.
You have purchased a game of the highest quality.
However, if you find any components
missing or damaged, please visit: Studio
catanstudio.com/support
For all other inquiries, contact us at: ™
info@catanstudio.com
catanstudio.com catan.com
If you would like to protect
your cards in this game, we
recommend Gamegenic card
sleeves.
The badge here indicates
what style of sleeves (RED)
and the number of packs (1)
required to sleeve all of the
cards in this CATAN expansion.
44
