explore
harvest
ExplorErs & piratEs 5-6 Assembling the Unexplored Areas GamE play New Rules for 5-6 Players deliver
®
Select the following components for the unexplored areas: The paired player rules are explained in CATAN 5-6. Changes
All of the rules from Explorers & Pirates for 2-4 players apply
GamE Board sEt-up
• 14 standard hexes (12 terrain hexes and 2 sea hexes) when playing 5-6 players. specific to Explorers & Pirates 5-6 are:
Assembling the Game Board Frame and all 12 number tokens, from the bag containing the
Assemble the game board frame as shown in Example 4.
“Standard HexeS + number tokenS—Green & oranGe”
NOTE: This 2023 revision of CATAN® – Explorers & Pirates 5-6 Player WAIT! You must have the following items before you can use this
sorting tile. Extension™ has new “paired player” rules that must be played with the 2023 extension:
The two sets of hexes in the illustration marked “Green Back” edition of CATAN – 5-6 Player Extension™. These rules replace the “special • CATAN
and “Orange Back” must be taken from the bag containing the • 6 terrain hexes and number tokens from the bag containing Player 1 Player 2 building phase” found in previous rules versions. All 2023 5-6 player extension • CATAN 5-6 Player Extension™ (aka CATAN 5-6)
“Standard HexeS + number tokenS—Green & oranGe” the “HexeS + number tokenS—e&P 5-6” sorting tile. Roll for production (mandatory) rules can be found online at catan.com for free. • CATAN – Explorers & Pirates™ (aka Explorers & Pirates)
• All 6 gold fields and pirate lairs from the bag containing the
sorting tile. Trade with other players and the supply Trade with the supply only GamE ComponEnt ovErviEw & prEparation
“Pirate LairS” sorting tile.
Creating the Starting Island Build Build
• 2 gold fields and pirate lairs from the bag containing the
Before Your First Game Game Components Required for
Set up the starting island as described in “Pirate Lairs 5-6.” Ship movement and actions Ship movement and actions
“HexeS + number tokenS—e&P 5-6” sorting tile.
All 5-6 Player Scenarios
Detach the die-cut parts from their cardboard frames
• 6 fish hexes from the bag containing the “FiSH For Catan”
40 unexplored hexes used in this scenario: and put the large “tri-hex” parts “D3” and “EG” into the A) Explorers & Pirates components required for each
sorting tile.
CATAN – Explorers & Pirates 5-6 Player Extension (aka corresponding scenario (see each scenario).
• 6 spice hexes from the bag containing the “SPiCeS For CrEdits Explorers & Pirates 5-6) box. B) CATAN game components listed on the “PIECES FROM BASE
Catan” sorting tile.
Author: Klaus Teuber Copyright © 2023 CATAN GmbH and CATAN Studio. CATAN, CATAN CATAN” sorting tile. Place these components into the bag with
=
Additional Preparations 5th Ed. Development Team: Pete Fenlon, Arnd Fischer, 5-6 Player Extension, CATAN – Explorers & Pirates, CATAN – the sorting tile.
Explorers & Pirates 5-6 Player Extension, The Settlers of Catan,
Separate the hexes into two stacks according to the orange Ron Magin, Benjamin Teuber, Guido Teuber C) CATAN 5-6 game components listed on the “CATAN 5-6
the “Catan Sun” logo, the “Glowing Yellow Sun” and “CATAN
or green icon on the back. Shuffle each stack, icon side up, and Art: Michael Menzel, Pete Fenlon Board” marks, and all marks herein are trademarks of CATAN PLAYER EXTENSION PIECES” sorting tile.
place them as shown in Example 4. Graphic Design: Pete Fenlon, Michaela Kienle, Ron Magin GmbH (catan.com) and are used under license by CATAN Studio. D) Various components from this extension, depending upon
Shuffle the 8 pirate lair tokens face down and place the stack Published by CATAN Studio, 1995 W. County Rd. B2, Roseville, MN Put all game components listed below into a bag: which scenario you are playing (see each scenario).
Production: Ron Magin, Pete Fenlon, Az Sperry
on the game board frame as shown in Example 4. 55113. Phone +1.651.639.1905. • 1 “HexeS + number tokenS—E&P 5-6”
Tile Component Design: Andreas Klober
= Separate the number tokens into two stacks according to the You have purchased a game of the highest quality. sorting tile.
Translation: Gavin Allister
orange or green icon on the back. Shuffle each stack, icon side However, if you find any components missing • 4 sea hexes (marked “EE”)
Wooden Piece Design: Klaus Teuber
up, and place them as shown in Example 4. or damaged, please visit: • 6 standard hexes “E”
Special Thanks: Brea Blankenfeld, Robert T. Carty, Jr.,
catanstudio.com/support green moon icon: mountains,
Sebastian Castro Casas, Coleman Charlton,
For all other inquiries, contact us at: forest, fields
Morgan Dontanville, Chris Funk, Alex Colón Hernández,
orange sun icon: mountains,
info@catanstudio.com
Stephanie Newman, Donna Prior, Anne Reynolds,
Example 4: pasture, hills
9 green moon Kelli Schmitz
• 6 number tokens (green: 2, 5, 9; orange: 3, 4, 10)
number tokens Original Product Development: TM-Spiele and Sebastian Place these components into a bag with the sorting tile.
• 2 gold field hexes (1 green moon; 1 orange sun)
Studio
Rapp. The author and publisher wish to thank the following Note: When playing with 5-6 players, we recommend
1 green • 2 pirate lair tokens: 9, 10
moon-backed sea hex people for playtesting: Stefan Wiewiora, Stefanie Dohmen, catanstudio.com ™ catan.com that you skip Scenario 1 (Land Ho!) and move straight to
Benjamin Teuber, Guido Teuber, Claudia Teuber, Gero Zahn, Put the remaining sets of game components each into their Scenario 2 (Pirate Lairs).
8 pirate lair own bag:
Arnd Beenen, Peter Gustav Bartschat, Dr. Reiner Düren,
tokens
Christoph Rother • “Green PLayer’S PieCeS” sorting tile,
1 green building costs card, 22 green game
pieces (4 harbor settlements,
9 crews, 3 ships, 2 settlers, 3 markers,
and 1 pirate ship)
• “brown PLayer’S PieCeS” sorting tile,
1 orange 1 brown building costs card, 22 brown
sun-backed sea hex
game pieces (4 harbor settlements,
9 crews, 3 ships, 2 settlers, 3 markers,
9 orange sun and 1 pirate ship)
number tokens
• “E&P 5-6 FiSH & SPiCeS” sorting tile,
2 fish hauls, 12 spice sacks
Europe is Autumn We seek without plunder
5 6 1
piratE lairs 5-6 Assembling the Unexplored Areas Fish For Catan 5-6 Additional Preparations spiCEs For Catan 5-6 Additional Preparations
Select the following components for the unexplored areas: Separate the hexes into two stacks according to the orange or Separate the hexes into two stacks according to the orange
GamE Board sEt-up • 14 standard hexes (12 terrain hexes and 2 sea hexes) and all GamE Board sEt-up green icon on the back. Shuffle each stack icon side up and place GamE Board sEt-up or green icon on the back. Shuffle each stack, icon side up, and
Assembling the Game Board Frame 12 number tokens from the bag containing the “Standard Assembling the Game Board Frame them as shown in Example 2. Assembling the Game Board Frame place them as shown in Example 3.
HexeS + number tokenS—Green & oranGe” sorting tile. Shuffle the 8 pirate lair tokens face down and place the stack Separate the number tokens into two stacks according to the
Assemble the game board frame as shown in Example 1. Assemble the game board frame as shown in Example 2. Assemble the game board frame as shown in Example 3.
• 6 standard hexes and number tokens from the bag on the game board frame as shown in Example 2. orange or green icon on the back. Shuffle each stack, icon side
The two sets of hexes in the illustration marked “Green Back” The two sets of hexes in the illustration marked “Green Back” The two sets of hexes in the illustration marked “Green Back”
containing the “HexeS + number tokenS—e&P 5-6” Separate the number tokens into two stacks according to the up, and place them as shown in Example 3.
and “Orange Back” must be taken from the bag containing the and “Orange Back” must be taken from the bag containing the and “Orange Back” must be taken from the bag containing the
sorting tile. orange or green icon on the back. Shuffle each stack, icon side
“Standard HexeS + number tokenS—Green & oranGe” “Standard HexeS + number tokenS—Green & oranGe” “Standard HexeS + number tokenS—Green & oranGe”
• All 6 gold fields and pirate lairs from the bag containing the up, and place them as shown in Example 2.
sorting tile. sorting tile. sorting tile.
“Pirate LairS” sorting tile.
Please note: In this scenario use the back side of the
• 2 gold fields and pirate lairs from the bag containing the Creating the Starting Island Creating the Starting Island
“D3” piece without the “Council of Catan” Island. “HexeS + number tokenS—e&P 5-6” sorting tile.
Set up the starting island as described in “Pirate Lairs 5-6.”
32 unexplored hexes used in this scenario:
Set up the starting island as described in “Pirate Lairs 5-6.”
32 unexplored hexes used in this scenario:
Creating the Starting Island
Additional Preparations
Assembling the Unexplored Areas Assembling the Unexplored Areas
Place the hexes and number tokens in the area of the
Separate the hexes into two stacks according to the orange or
Select the following components for the unexplored areas: Select the following components for the unexplored areas:
starting island. For this purpose, use the contents of the 2 bags
green icon on the back. Shuffle each stack icon side up and place
• 12 terrain hexes (2 of the extra standard sea hexes are not • 14 standard hexes (12 terrain hexes and 2 sea hexes) and all
containing the “PIECES FROM BASE CATAN” and the “Catan 5-6 = =
them as shown in Example 1.
used) and all 12 number tokens from the bag containing 12 number tokens from the bag containing the “Standard
PLayer extenSion PieCeS” sorting tiles.
Shuffle the 8 pirate lair tokens face down and place the stack
the “Standard HexeS + number tokenS—Green & HexeS + number tokenS—Green & oranGe” sorting tile.
Shuffle all 21 hexes face down, then randomly distribute the
on the game board frame as shown in Example 1.
oranGe” sorting tile. • 6 terrain hexes and number tokens from the bag containing
terrain hexes face up in the area of the starting island.
Separate the number tokens into two stacks according to the
• 6 terrain hexes and number tokens from the bag containing the “HexeS + number tokenS—e&P 5-6” sorting tile.
Place all 22 number tokens exactly as shown in Example 1.
orange or green icon on the back. Shuffle each stack, icon side
the “HexeS + number tokenS—e&P 5-6” sorting tile. • 6 spice hexes from the bag containing the “SPiCeS For Catan”
up, and place them as shown in Example 1.
• 6 gold fields and pirate lairs from the bag containing the sorting tile.
“Pirate Lairs” sorting tile. • 6 fish hexes from the bag containing the “FiSH For Catan”
• 2 gold fields and pirate lairs from the bag containing the = sorting tile. =
28 unexplored hexes used in this scenario:
“HexeS + number tokenS—e&P 5-6” sorting tile.
= = • 6 fish hexes from the bag containing the “FiSH For Catan”
sorting tile.
Example 1: Example 2: Example 3:
9 green moon 9 green moon 9 green moon
number tokens number tokens number tokens
1 green
1 green 1 green
moon-backed sea hex
moon-backed sea hex moon-backed sea hex
8 pirate lair 8 pirate lair
tokens tokens
1 orange 1 orange 1 orange
sun-backed sea hex sun-backed sea hex sun-backed sea hex
9 orange sun 9 orange sun 9 orange sun
number tokens number tokens number tokens
Explore Harvest Retrieve Revel in nature Revere it as home Wool
2 3 4
