Trade Leave no trace
Build Leave a legacee
Settle ® wood
You have arrived on the island of Catan. Its uninhabited lands lie before you,
stretching for miles in all directions. It offers the promise of bountiful harvests
and plentiful resources. As you make plans to build a new life here, you discover
that you are not alone. Several other newly-arrived leaders are planning their
futures here as well. The race to build a bright and prosperous new community has
begun!
The CATAN® – 5-6 Player Extension™ (aka CATAN 5-6) allows you to add one to two
players to your CATAN games. The island is larger, the demand for resources is fiercer, and
the thrills are even greater!
NOTE: This 2022 revision has new “paired player” rules that replace the special building phase
found in previous editions of CATAN 5-6. Longtime CATAN fans should take note. You can
download the new rules from catan.com for free.
Game Components
To play CATAN 5-6, you need nearly all of the components from the CATAN base game,
plus the following pieces:
88
••••••••••
11 terrain hexes 4 small sea frames 28 number tokens
(1 Desert, 2 ea. Forest, Hills, Pasture, (2 with harbors, 2 without) (brown text on back)
Fields, and Mountains)
10 settlements 30 roads 8 cities ••• AYYoo cuu it mc y a ra *n ey En p x loo a c nte c lpp eyl s t ai pa oyln n aay : a dP 1l e r l a e vda ey eli dvon ey pg l-om b V pu eP mi n l c tet a ns cr etad t rct s l da e f r o m od rn e p t n th eh tr e . e t w utui r nrn .n.* you buy it.*
(5 per player) (15 per player) (4 per player) ••• AYYoo cuu it mc y a ra *n ey En p x loo a c nte c lpp eyl s t ai pa oyln n aay : a dP 1l e r l a e vda ey eli dvon ey pg l-om b V pu eP mi n l c tet a ns cr etad t rct s l da e f r o m od rn e p t n th eh tr e . e t w utui r nrn .n.* you buy it.*
2 Building Costs
cards
Player 1 and player 2 markers 25 resource 9 development 2 optional
with plastic bases cards cards harbor pieces
Note: When you want to play with 3-4 players again, we have made it easy to separate the
cardboard CATAN 5-6 components from the CATAN components.
• Look at the front of the terrain hexes. The CATAN 5-6 hexes all have a
watermark icon (depicted here) printed in the lower left corner.
CATAN terrain hexes have no watermarks.
• Look at the back of the number tokens. The letters on the back of the
A A
CATAN 5-6 tokens are dark brown. The letters on the standard CATAN
number tokens are black.
22
Game Rules foR 5-6 playeRs
Except as noted below, CATAN 5-6 uses the same rules found in CATAN. The additional
rules include:
• Assembling the larger board (add small frame pieces)
• Creating the supply (add more cards)
• The 5-6 player set-up phase
• The paired players turn
settinG up a 5-6 playeR Game
Assembling the Larger Board
To begin each game, you need to assemble the board. CATAN 5-6 uses a board very
similar to the one in CATAN, but expanded with additional small sea frames.
Note: The 5 and 6 player games use all of the hexagonal tiles from CATAN 5-6 and all of the
tiles from the CATAN base game. However, you only use the number tokens from this extension
(lettered A to Y and ZA, ZB, and ZB).
Assemble the frame as specified in CATAN and add the 4 small sea frame pieces from
CATAN 5-6 as shown here:
• Place the small “2-2” all-sea frame
Add the Small Sea Frames
piece between the “2-2” joint of the
CATAN frames (A).
DD 11
66
• Place the small “3-3” 2:1 wool harbor
frame piece between the 66
AA
“3-3” joint of the CATAN frames (B).
22
• Place the samll “5-5” 3:1 harbor
frame piece between the “5-5” joint of
22
55
the CATAN frames (C).
CC
• Place the small “6-6” all-sea frame
55
piece between the “6-6” joint of the
33
CATAN frames (D). BB
33
44
33
Create the Supply
Add the 25 resource cards and 9 development cards to the cards for 3-4 players. Sort the
resource cards into 5 stacks. Put them face up beside the board. Shuffle the development
cards and place them face down beside the board. These card stacks form the supply.
Place the “Longest Road” and “Largest Army” special VP cards beside the supply.
The 5-6 Player Set-up Phase
Take your starting pieces
Select a color and take your 5 settlements, 4 cities, and 15 roads. Also take your color’s
“Building Costs” card. If this is your first 5-player game, see the note on page 5.
For your first 5-6 player game: Use the Starting Set-up for 5-6 New Players
(see image on page 5). Once set-up is complete, give each player their starting resources
from the settlements marked with white stars (HH) as shown.
For 5-6 experienced players: Once you are comfortable with the 5-6 player rules, add
the terrain hexes to the frame as follows:
1. Shuffle all 30 terrain hexes face down and place them face down inside the frame.
2. T urn the hexes face up, without changing their location.
3. Take the number tokens from CATAN 5-6 (brown letters on back).
Place the number token labeled “A” on any one of the six corner hexes (we chose the
upper right in our example on page 5). Continue placing the tokens in alphabetical
order along a spiral, starting on the outside hexes and proceeding counter-clockwise
toward the center of the board. Place each token so that the numbered side is facing
up. When the series of tokens reaches a desert hex, skip over that hex and continue on
the other side.
Note: The last three tokens are each marked with two letters: ZA, ZB, ZC.
4. Place the robber on either of the desert hexes.
Optional: Some experienced players like to randomize their harbors. To do so,
Random harbor
here’s how: Take the 11 harbor pieces (9 from CATAN + 2 from CATAN 5-6) and
option
shuffle them face down. Randomly place them on top of each harbor on the
frame as shown.
Starting settlements and resources
44
Starting Set-up for 5-6 New Players*
11
66
11 00 66
Red 66 •••••• •••••••••• WWhhiittee
••
66
••••••••
22••
••
99
••••••
11••••11
2
••33•• 11••••11
••
55
••••••
11
••••
00
•• ••
44
•• ••
2
HH HH
2
••
55
•••••• ••
44
•• •• ••
66
••••••••
••33••
••
88
••••••••
2
Blue
55 HH HH HH
Orange
11••22 11
••••
00
••
22••
••
44
•• ••
11••••11
55 HH
•• 88 •••••••• ••33•• •• 99 •••••• •• 55 ••••••
33
••
99
••••••
11••22
••
88
••••••••
Green
33
Brown
44
* For your first 5 player
Number Token Placement Order
game: One color remains
inactive in the game. To
determine which color, a
player takes 1 road of each C B A
color and hides them in
their hand. Each player D Q p O
takes 1 road at random
R Y X N
from this hand (unseen).
The remaining road is E S Za Zc W M
the inactive color. Leave
that color’s settlements F T Zb L
on the board as inactive
G U V K
settlements, but remove
the roads. This will H I J
maintain a fair starting
set-up for all players.
55
• Each player, in turn, rolls the dice to determine the starting player as in CATAN.
• Place your first 2 settlements, 2 roads, and receive your starting resources, using the
method described in Set-Up on page 12 of the CATAN Almanac.
new Rules foR 5-6 playeRs
The phases used in CATAN remain the same–resource production, trade, and build. For
5-6 players, use the new paired player rules during trading and building.
Note: If you have played previous versions of CATAN 5-6, this paired player rule replaces the
special building phase.
Determine the Paired Players
• If you are the starting player, place the player 1 marker in front of yourself.
• Place the player 2 marker in front of the third player to the left of player 1.
Note: For the remainder of these rules, we will refer to the players with these markers as
player 1 and player 2, respectively.
Paired Player Rules
The phases used in CATAN remain generally the same. Player 1 rolls the dice for the
turn. However, during the trade/build phase, both player 1 and player 2 can take actions.
Player 1 must always complete their portion of the paired turn before player 2 can begin
their portion.
Paired Players
5 players 6 players
The third player to the left of the The third player to the left of the
starting player is player 2. starting player is player 2.
2. 3. 3.
2.
1.
1.
The starting player The starting player
is player 1. is player 1.
66
Paired Player Turn Order
Player 1 performs this part of a turn just as you would in CATAN.
• Begin the turn with the production dice roll. All players take their resources
(or any “7” roll is resolved) as usual in CATAN.
The Combined Trade/Build Phase is slightly different with the paired players rule.
Player 1 goes first and may do the following in any order:
• Trade resource cards with all players as usual AND trade resource cards with the
supply as usual.
• Build anything shown on your “Building Costs” card and play 1 development card
as usual.
After player 1 completes their portion of the paired turn, player 2 takes their part of
the paired turn.
Player 2 may do the following in any order:
• Trade cards ONLY with the supply.
• Build anything shown on your “Building Costs” card and play 1 development card
as usual (even VP cards to win the game).
After player 2 completes their part of the turn, the paired players each pass their
respective markers to the player on their left. Player 1 also passes the dice. The new
player 1 starts a new turn.
Ending the Game Clarifications
You win the game if you are the first player to reach 10 or more victory points on your
turn (as in CATAN). However, if there is ever an instance when both player 1 and
player 2 reach 10 points during the same turn, player 1 wins the game before player 2
can take their part of the paired turn.
77
Player 1 and 2 Actions Overview
Player 1 Player 2
Roll for production (mandatory)
Trade with other players and the supply Trade with the supply only
Build Build
Play 1 development card Play 1 development card
CRedits
Design: Klaus Teuber
Art: Michael Menzel, Pete Fenlon
Graphic Design: Pete Fenlon, Michaela Kienle, and Ron Magin
Production: Ron Magin, Alex Colón Hernández, Az Sperry
Paired Player Turn Development: Team CATAN
Special Thanks: Gavin Allister, Brea Blankenfeld, Arnd Beenen, Sebastian Castro Casas, Morgan
Dontanville, Pete Fenlon, Arnd Fischer, Jasmin Fuss, Ralph Hamor (LSKC/1-804), Sonja
Krützfeldt, Stephanie Newman, Donna Prior, Anne Reynolds, Kelli Schmitz, Benjamin Teuber,
Guido Teuber
Copyright © 2023 CATAN GmbH and CATAN Studio. CATAN, CATAN – 5-6 Player Extension, The Settlers of
Catan, the “Catan Sun” logo, the “Glowing Yellow Sun” and “CATAN Board” marks, and all marks herein are
trademarks of CATAN GmbH (catan.com) and are used under license by CATAN Studio. Published by CATAN
Studio, 1995 W. County Rd. B2, Roseville, MN 22113. Phone +1.651.639.1905.
You have purchased a game of the highest quality.
However, if you find any components
missing or damaged, please visit:
Studio catanstudio.com/support
™
catanstudio.com catan.com
If you would like to protect your cards in this game, we recommend Gamegenic™ card
sleeves. This badge indicates the style of sleeve via the color code (RED) and the number
of packs required (1) to sleeve all the cards in this extension.
88
