Klaus Teuber
GG RR
aammee uulleess
aa
&& llmmaannaacc
Dear Settlers,
To make it as easy as possible for you to start playing Catan , we use an award-winning rules system, which consists
®
of 3 parts. First, if you do not know how to play Catan, please read the Game Overview on page 16 (the back cover).
Next, read the Game Rules on pages 2-6 (red borders) and start to play the game. If you have questions during the
game, consult the Catan Almanac on pages 6-15 (gold borders).
Now you are ready for your first adventure on Catan. Have fun settling this new land together!
— Klaus Teuber
You can find further information at:
catan.com catanstudio.com klausteuber.com
G R
ame ules
These 4-page rules (pages 2-5) contain all the important ConstruCtinG the island
information that you need to play!
The frame pieces hold the board together and prevent
If you need more information during the game, you can look
the pieces from moving after the board is in place. Before
up keywords (marked Y) in the “Almanac,” which follows
building the island, assemble the frame by matching the
these rules.
numbers at the ends of the frame pieces together (i.e., 1-1,
2-2, etc.).
Game Components
You can then construct the island of Catan using the 19
• 19 terrain hexes (tiles)
terrain hexes as shown on page 3.
• 6 sea frame pieces
Starting Set-up for Beginners
• 9 harbor pieces
• 18 circular number tokens You can play the game Catan on a variable game board.
For your first game, however, we suggest that you use the
• 95 resource cards (bearing the symbols for the brick,
“Starting Set-up for Beginners Y.” (See Illus. A on page 3.)
grain, lumber, ore, and wool resources)
This set-up is well-balanced for all players.
• 25 development cards (14 knight cards,
6 progress cards, 5 victory point cards) Before your first game, you must remove the die-cut
components from the cardboard holders. Carefully punch
• 4 “Building Costs” cards
out and separate the pieces. When punching tiles out of the
• 2 special cards: “Longest Road” & “Largest Army”
die-cut sheets, always push the tiles through from the front,
• 16 cities (4 of each color, shaped like churches)
“cut” side (pushing from the back may cause the tiles to rip).
• 20 settlements (5 of each color, shaped like houses)
Lay out the map as specified in Illustration A (or on the
• 60 roads (15 of each color, shaped like bars)
back of this booklet).
• 2 dice (1 yellow, 1 red)
First, assemble the frame as shown. Second, create Catan
• 1 robber
by placing the 19 terrain hexes on the table—again as
• 1 “Game Rules & Almanac” booklet
shown. Third, place the circular number tokens on top of
the designated terrain hexes. Finally, place your settlements
and roads.
Africa is spring and we walk five paths toward the sun
22
Illustration A
Starting Map Begin the game with
for Beginners the resource cards
produced by the
To make it as easy as possible
settlements
for you to get started with
marked with
Catan, we use an award-
1100 22 99 white stars.
winning rules system, which •••••• •• ••••••••
See HH .
consists of 3 parts—the
Overview, the Game
HH
Rules, and 1122 66 44 1100
•• •••••••••• •••••• ••••••
the Almanac.
If you’ve never
played Catan, HH
99 1111 33 88
please read the •••••••• •••• •••• ••••••••••
RRoobbbbeerr
game Overview
first—it’s on the
back cover of this 88HH 33 HH 44 55
•••••••••• •••• •••••• ••••••••
booklet. Next, read the
Odds fOr
Game Rules and start
dice rOlls
to play. And finally, if you
55 66 1111 2 & 12 = 3%
have questions during the •••••••• •••••••••• ••••
3 & 11 = 6%
game, please consult the
4 & 10 = 8%
Almanac (it begins on page 6).
5 & 9 = 11%
6 & 8 = 14%
Resource Production 7 = 17%
Hills Forest Mountains Fields Pasture Desert
Produce Brick Produces Lumber Produce Ore Produce Grain Produces Wool Produces Nothing
Starting Set-up for Experienced Players Place the special cards “Longest Road” and “Largest Army”
beside the game board along with the 2 dice.
It is more fun to play with a variable game board—with the
game board laid out randomly. The board changes each game. Sort the resource cards into 5 stacks and put them face up
If you would like to use the variable set-up, you can find the next to the game board.
guidelines in the Almanac under Set-up, Variable Y. Also look Shuffle the development Illustration B
for useful tips under Set-up Phase Y and Tactics Y. cards and place them face
down by the board.
settinG up the Game
You receive resources Y
15 S r e o le a c d t s a ( c n o o l o m r o a r n e d a t n a d k e n o yo l u es r s 5 !) s . e P t l t a le c m e e y n o t u s r , 4 2 c ro it a ie d s s , a a n n d d f a o r r o u ea n c d h y o te u r r r a s i t n a r h ti e n x g •tu • Ur A nsu , C aa iln tlyyd ,r yy eoo puu la oc c a en t s nh l yn a e npot l ut aa rpyl nl r a1e iy a t d ’ d as ey v bd -eb uelu vi o le ip t l l. mt o S pee mnttte l nceam t rc eda n rpt de. ro n g Th ets e t h fi i r s s t c a p l r 2 l d a a y . V R e A i r G c n t t e o o o t s r h p y t e l a P r y a o p i 3 R l n a K m t y s e n ! r y i g w h h t o c a p r l d ay s s
more Knight cards takes this card.
your 2 settlements on the game board. Place your remaining settlement marked
settlements, roads, and cities down in front of you. with a white star HH
lonGest Road
2 Victory Points!
Note: If you are playing a 3-player game, nobody plays the (see Illustration A). Take Th lon is g c e a s r t d r o g a o d e s o t f o a t t h le e a p st l a 5 y e s r e g w m it e h n t t h s. e
Another player who builds a longer
road takes this card.
red position indicated on the starting map. the appropriate resource
Take your color’s building costs card. (See Illustration B.) cards from their stacks.
33
Example: See Illustration A. Blue receives 1 brick card, 2. Trade Y
1 lumber card, and 1 ore card for his leftmost settlement
Afterwards, you may trade freely (using either or both types of
(i.e., his settlement marked with a star HH).
trades below) to gain needed resource cards:
Each player keeps their resource cards hidden in their hand.
a) Domestic Trade Y
Important: Settlements and
Illustration C On your turn, you can trade resource cards with any of the
cities may only be placed at
other players. You can announce which resources you need and
the corners of the terrain
what you are willing to trade for them. The other players can
hexes—never along the edges
also make their own proposals and counteroffers.
(see Illustration C). Roads may
Important: Players may only trade with the player whose
only be placed at the edges of
turn it is. The other players may not trade among themselves.
the terrain hexes—1 road per
edge (see Illustration D). The b) Maritime Trade Y
Distance Rule Y means many You can also trade without the other players! During your
intersections along roads will turn, you can always trade at 4:1 by putting 4 identical resource
remain unoccupied. cards back in their stack and taking any 1 resource card of your
choice for it. If you have a settlement or city on a harbor Y, you
turn overview
can trade with the bank more favorably: at either a 3:1 ratio or,
Unless you’re using the Starting
in certain harbors, at 2:1 (trading the resource type shown).
Set-Up for Experienced Players,
Important: The 4:1 trade is always possible, even if you do
the oldest player goes first.
not have a settlement on a harbor.
On your turn, you can do the
3. Build Y
following in the order listed: Illustration D
Now you can build. Through building, you can increase your
• You must roll for resource
production Y (the result applies to all players). victory points Y, expand your road network, improve your
resource production, and/or buy useful development cards. To
• You may trade Y resource cards with other players and/or
build, you must pay specific combinations of resource cards
use maritime trade Y.
(see the Building Costs Card Y). Take the appropriate number
• You may build Y roads Y, settlements Y or cities Y and/
of roads, settlements, and/or cities from your supply and place
or buy development cards Y. You may also play one
them on the game board. Keep development cards hidden in
development card Y at any time during your turn.
your hand.
After you’re done, pass the dice to the player to your left, who
You cannot build more pieces than what is available in your
then continues the game with step 1.
pool—a maximum of 5 settlements, 4 cities, and 15 roads.
Tip: For advanced players, we recommend combining the
a) Road Y Requires: Brick & Lumber
second and third steps. You can find more details in the
A new road must always connect to 1 of your existing roads,
Almanac under “Combined Trade/Build Phase Y.”
settlements, or cities. Only 1 road can be
The Turn in Detail
built on any given path Y.
1. Resource Production The first player to build a continuous
You begin your turn by rolling both dice. The road (not counting forks) of at least 5
sum of the dice determines which terrain hexes road segments receives the special card
produce resources. “Longest Road Y.” If another player
Each player who has a settlement on an intersection Y that succeeds in building a longer road than
borders a terrain hex marked with the number rolled receives the one created by the current owner of the “Longest Road”
1 resource card of the hex’s type. For an example see resource card, they immediately take the special card (and its 2 victory
production Y. If you have 2 or 3 settlements bordering that hex, points). Tip: This creates a 4 victory point swing!
you receive 1 resource card for each settlement. You receive
2 resource cards for each city you own that borders that hex.
If there are not enough of a given resource in the supply to
fulfill everyone’s production, then no one receives any of that
resource during that turn (unless it only affects 1 player).
44
HbmG nataC 5102 ©
HbmG nataC 5102 ©
=
b) Settlement Y Requires: Brick, Lumber, Wool, & Grain (2) Then you steal 1 (random) resource card from an
Take special note of the “Distance opponent who has a settlement or city adjacent to the target
Rule” Y: you may only build a terrain hex. The player who is robbed holds their resource
settlement at an intersection if all cards face down. You then take 1 card at random. If the
3 of the adjacent intersections are target hex is adjacent to 2 or more players’ settlements or
vacant (i.e., none are occupied by any cities, you choose which one you want to steal from.
settlements or cities—even yours). Important: If the production number for the hex containing
Each of your settlements must connect to at least 1 of your the robber is rolled, the owners of adjacent settlements and
cities do not receive resources. The robber prevents it.
own roads. Regardless of whose turn it is (i.e., during any
production phase), when a terrain hex produces resources, you b) Playing Development Cards Y
receive 1 resource card for each settlement you have adjacent At any time during your turn, you may play 1 development
to that terrain hex. card (put it face up on the table). That card, however, may not
Each settlement is worth 1 victory point. be a card you bought during the same turn (except for a victory
c) City Y Requires: 3 Ore & 2 Grain point card, as described below)!
You may only establish a city by Knight Cards (Purple Frame) Y
upgrading one of your settlements. If you play a knight card, you must
When you upgrade a settlement to a immediately move the robber. See “Rolling
city, put the settlement (house) piece a ‘7’ and Activating the Robber” above and
back in your supply and replace it with follow steps 1 and 2.
a city piece (church). Once played, knight cards remain face
Cities produce twice as many resources as settlements. up in front of you. The first player to have
You acquire 2 resource cards for an adjacent terrain hex that 3 knight cards in front of themself receives
produces resources. the special card “Largest Army,” which is
worth 2 victory points. If another player has
Each city is worth 2 victory points.
more knight cards in front of them than the
d) Buying a Development Card Y
current holder of the Largest Army card, they
Requires: Ore, Wool, & Grain
immediately take the special card and its
When you buy a development card,
2 victory points.
draw the top card from the deck.
There are 3 different kinds of these Progress Cards (Green Frame) Y
cards: knight Y, progress Y, and If you play a progress card, follow its
victory point Y. Each has a different instructions. Then the card is removed from
effect (see 4.b, below). the game (i.e., toss it in the box).
Development cards never go back into the supply, and you Victory Point Cards (Orange Frame) Y
cannot buy development cards if the supply is empty. You must keep victory point cards hidden.
Keep your development cards hidden (in your hand) until You may only reveal them during your turn
you use them, so your opponents can’t anticipate your play. and when you are sure that you have 10
4. Special Cases victory points—that is, to win the game. Of
course, you can reveal them after the end of a) Rolling a “7” and Activating the Robber Y
the game if someone else wins. You may play
If you roll a “7,” no one receives any resources.
any number of victory point cards during your
Instead, every player who has more than 7 resource cards
turn, even during the turn you purchase them.
must select half (rounded down) of their resource cards and
return them to the bank. endinG the Game
Then you must move the robber Y. Proceed as follows: If you have 10 or more victory points during your turn,
(1) You must move the robber Y immediately to the number the game ends and you are the winner! If you reach 10 points
token of any other terrain hex or to the desert Y hex. when it is not your turn, the game continues until any player
(including you) has 10 points on their turn.
55
HbmG nataC 5102 ©
HbmG nataC 5102 ©
= HbmG nataC 5102 ©
HbmG nataC 5102 ©
=
HbmG nataC 5102 ©
HbmG nataC 5102 ©
HbmG nataC 5102 ©
HbmG nataC 5102 ©
HbmG nataC 5102 ©
HbmG nataC 5102 ©
HbmG nataC 5102 ©
HbmG nataC 5102 ©
KNIGHT
Move the robber.
Steal 1 resource from the
owner of a settlement or
city adjacent to the
robber’s new hex.
=
HbmG
nataC
5102
©
HbmG
nataC
5102 ©
MONOPOLY
When you play this card,
announce 1 type of resource. All other players must give
you all of their resources
of that type.
HbmG nataC
5102 ©
LIBRARY
1 Victory Point!
Reveal this card on your
turn if, with it, you reach
the number of points required for victory.
a
lmanac
This “Catan Almanac” contains detailed, alphabetical entries When you build a city, the upgraded settlement piece becomes
and examples for Catan. These are not the “Game Rules.” available again. You can use it to build another settlement later.
You do not have to read this material prior to your first game. Example: See Illustration E. Claudia, the blue player, rolls
Instead, use the Game Rules. Then read this to enjoy the a resource production roll of “8.” She receives 3 ore cards: 1
complete experience. ore for her settlement and 2 ore for her city. Benny, the red
This almanac includes advanced rules and clarifications. You player, receives 2 lumber for his city.
can also refer to it if any questions arise during a game.
Illustration E
BB
Build (BuildinG)
You may build on your turn after you have rolled for resource
production and finished trading. To build, you must turn in the
specified combinations of resource cards (see the Building EE
88
Costs Cards Y). Return the resource cards to the supply stacks. ••••••••••
You can build as many items and buy as many cards as
you desire—as long as you have enough resources to “pay”
for them and they are still available in the supply. (See 88 EE
••••••••••
Settlements Y, Cities Y, Roads Y, and Development Cards Y.)
Each player has a supply of 15 roads, 5 settlements, and 4
cities. If you build a city, return the settlement to your supply.
Roads and cities, however, remain on the board until the end of Hint: It is extremely difficult to win the game without
the game once they are built. upgrading settlements to cities. Since you only have 5
Your turn is over after “building,” and the player to your left settlements available, you can only reach 5 victory points by
continues the game. only building settlements.
New rule variant: see Combined Trade/Build Phase Y. Coast
BuildinG Costs Cards When a terrain hex borders on the sea (i.e., a frame piece),
it is called a “coast.” You can build a road along a coast. You
The building costs cards show what can be built and which
can build settlements and upgrade settlements to cities on
resources are required. When you pay building costs, you must
intersections that border on the sea. However, since a site on
return the necessary resources to their supply stacks. You
the coast borders only 1 or 2 terrain hexes, coastal settlements
can build settlements Y and roads Y, upgrade settlements to
generate smaller resource yields. Still, coastal sites often lie
cities Y, and buy development cards Y.
on harbors, which allow you to use maritime trade Y to trade
CC resources at more favorable rates.
Cities
ComBined trade/Build phase
The separation of the trade and build phases was introduced
You cannot build a city directly. You can only
to make the sequence easier to learn for beginners. We
upgrade an existing settlement to a city. You pay
recommend experienced players ignore this separation.
the required resources, return the settlement to
your supply, and replace the settlement with a city on the same After rolling for resource production, you can trade and build
intersection Y. Each city is worth 2 victory points. You receive in any order (you can trade, build, trade again and build again,
double resource production (2 resource cards) from the etc.). You can even use a harbor on the same turn you build a
adjacent terrain hexes whenever those numbers are rolled. settlement there. Using this method speeds up the game a lot.
66
DD
Illustration F
desert
The desert is the only terrain hex that
does not produce resources. The
robber Y starts the game there.
A settlement or a city built
adjacent to the desert yields
fewer resources than those built
next to one of the other terrain types.
development Cards
There are 3 different kinds of development
cards: Knight Cards Y, Progress Cards Y, and
domestiC trade
Victory Point Cards Y. On your turn, you may trade resources with the other players
When you buy a development card, take (after rolling for resource production). You and the other
the top card of the draw pile into your hand. players negotiate the terms of your trades—such as which
Keep your development cards hidden until cards will be exchanged. You may trade as many times as you
you play them. This keeps the other players can, using single or multiple cards. However, you cannot give
in the dark. away cards, or trade matching resources (“trade” 3 ore for 1
ore, for example).
You cannot trade or give away development cards.
Important: While it is your turn, you must be a part of
You may only play 1 development card during your turn—
all trades, and the other players may not trade among
either 1 knight card or 1 progress card. You can play the
themselves.
card at any time, even before you roll the dice. You may not,
Example: It is Pete’s turn. He needs one brick to build a
however, play a card that you bought during the same turn.
road. He has 2 lumber and 3 ore. Pete asks aloud, “Who will
Exception: If you buy a card and it is a victory point card Y
give me 1 brick for 1 ore?” Beth answers, “If you give me
that brings you to 10 points, you
3 ore, I’ll give you a brick.” Cooper interjects, “I’ll give you
may immediately reveal this card LIBRARY
1 brick if you give me 1 lumber and 1 ore.” Pete accepts
(and all other VP cards) and
MARKET
Cooper’s offer and trades a lumber and an ore for a brick.
win the game.
c y v o i a c u r Y t d o o o s r u r y w o a p h n n o e l i y o n n p r t t s e p h v o a e e n n a g d e l a n m v d t i e c e r c t e o i l a s a r c r y o h e v p s e e o s v r i i — n 1 c t 0 t o + o r n y. ce GR HbmG nataC 510 E 1 2 © A T V R tu e i v r H t n e c h a r Hbm i G e t na l taC e 5 A 1 f 02 © , q t n o h w L u u 1 i i i r L m s t r h e c y b d R t a V i u e t © r e 2 f 0 r , 1 r 5 d P o t v C i ata n h n y o G e r rm c o b o H f e e a o i v n u q f p l i t n , c u o i t y r o w u t h i o i e o n n r m i i a u r e t r s t c h y r d s b t . © c h 2 1 0 y 1 5 e C t a ! a t i a f r n u G t t r m o bH e r R h , r d r q o P y e e n V u f v vo o n i i e i p u in o f r cu a ,o e c t l m r w y o d i i e 1 nt ot ri h b a f n t ty t u o o u h e c is r . t R r s r h r e h r V t e i r q n c v e o t v , ! a i u f y e c n i i y r i f p a t d o u c r , o o l e u w m r P o i d t t y n h i n r . b o t f t e i h o o e s y s a r r r o c i c i t u o h v a , y n i f r r y c d p o t t C o o u P o r ! i n n y r H o . e t y s a o A i c u h n P r E t! L en N If o d y t o e i u n B h G et a h v t e m — h a e y o r n G o re t a a t m c ra h e d — e w 10 it h vi EE c C t o o o r p y er, since it is Pete’s turn.
distanCe rule
points on your turn, the game ends
You may only build a settlement immediately and you win! You can only
on an unoccupied intersection Y and only if none of the 3 win during your turn. If somehow you find
adjacent intersections contains a settlement or city. you have 10 victory points during another
Example: See Illustration F. Coleman, the blue player, wants player’s turn, you must wait until your next
to build a settlement. The settlements marked “A” are already turn to claim victory.
lonGest Road
in play. Coleman cannot build on the intersections marked
“B.” He can only build at intersection “C.” Example: Siobhán has 2 settlements Th Alonni o sg t ceh ase rtr d r r o op 2g a al oV ad de y i s teo c a r ttf k oo wa e r t s t h y h l t oeeP h a b o i ps su i tl n a ci5 a y l t d s r es d ! s re . ga w ml i o teh nn g tte hsr.e
(2 points), the Longest Road special
card (2 points), 2 cities (4 points),
and 2 victory point cards (2 points). MARKET UNIVERSITY
She reveals her 2 victory point cards,
g S i h v e i n su g r h p e r r i s t e h s e h 1 e 0 r p o o p i p n o t n s e n n e t e s d a e n d d t o win. © 2015 Catan GmbH HbmG nataC 1 5102 © V Rt r ue ie tt v 1 uh r q t c en u re R h a n it i r n e lr e f V e v e iu ,t of e qn d , hm w i a uu w if rlc i i obs mt i t r ret h hy t ch e r b v a i o d i s ioi e tr c t, f fr c,d P t r o a o pyyor or r y ooo f od y n iu v u .n p i o i r P t y corn se t o ie n a onyuo acr otcr t hys u i . h ! r n t!
claims victory!
77
HbmG nataC
5102 ©
AA
BB
CC BB AA
UNIVERSITY 1 Victory Point! Reveal this card on your turn if, with it, you reach
the number of points required for victory.
GG KK
Game play KniGht Cards
Here is a summary of the the game sequence, plus some When you play a “Knight” development card during your turn,
more specific entries where you can find details: you must immediately move the robber Y. Place the knight card
(1) Lay out the game board: Set-up, Variable Y face up in front of you.
(2) Initial set-up: Set-up Phase Y You must move the robber away from its current spot and
onto the number token of any other terrain hex or on the
(3) Play
desert.
The starting player begins the game. The other players follow
You then steal 1 resource card from a player who has a
in clockwise order.
settlement or a city adjacent to the robber. If there are 2 or
On your turn, you complete these 3 phases in order:
more such players, you may choose your victim.
• Roll for Resource Production Y (the roll applies to
The player you elect to rob keeps their cards face down while
all players)
you take 1 of their cards at random. If that player has no cards,
• Trade Y
you get nothing! (However, you can always ask players about the
• Build Y number of cards they hold. They must answer truthfully.)
You may play 1 development card any time during your turn. If you are the first player to have 3 knight cards face up in
Pass the dice to the player on your left at the end of your turn. front of you, you take the “Largest Army” Y special card. This
That player then takes their turn using the same 3 phases. special card is worth 2 victory points.
If another player has more face-up knight cards than you,
HH
they take the special card and the 2 victory points that go with it.
harBors Example: See Illustration H. On Niall’s turn, he plays a
knight card and moves the robber from the fields hex to the
Harbors allow you to trade
hills hex with the “4.” Niall may now steal a random resource
resources more favorably. In
card from player A or B.
order to control a harbor, you
must build a settlement on a Illustration H
coastal intersection Y which
borders the harbor. See also
AA
“Maritime Trade” Y.
BB
II JJ
44
••••••
interseCtions
Intersections are
the points where Illustration G
LL
3 hexes meet. See
Illustration G. You may
larGest army
only build settlements
If you are the first player to play
on intersections. The
3 knight cards, you receive this special
influence (for resource
card, which is worth 2 victory points.
yields) of settlements
You place the “Largest Army” card face
and cities extends into
the 3 adjacent terrain
up in front of you. If another player laRGest aRmy
2 Victory Points!
hexes that form the plays more knight cards than you have, ge Th ts e t h fi i r s s t c a p r l d a . y A er n t o o t h p e la r y p 3 la y k e n r i g w h h t o c a p r l d a s y s
they immediately take the special card. more knight cards takes this card.
intersection.
The 2 victory points likewise count for
the new owner.
88
lonGest road MM
If you are the first player to build a
continuous road of at least 5 individual
maritime trade
road pieces, you take this special card On your turn, you can trade resources using maritime trade
and place it face up in front of you. This during the trade phase even without involving another player.
card is worth 2 victory points.
The most basic (and unfavorable) exchange rate is 4:1.
Note: If your road network You may trade 4 identical resource cards
branches, you may only count the to the supply in exchange for
single longest branch for purposes of 1 resource card of your choice. You
the longest road. do not need a harbor Y (settlement
If you hold the “Longest Road” card and another player at a harbor location) to trade at 4:1,
builds a longer road, they immediately take your “Longest so when nobody wants to trade…
Road” card. They also acquire the 2 bonus victory points.
Example: Benny returns 4 ore cards to the supply and takes
(Since you also lose the 2 victory points, it is a 4 point swing!)
1 lumber card in exchange. Normally, he should first try a
Example: See Illustration I. Emily, the red player, builds a more favorable trade with the other players (domestic trade).
continuous road with 7 wooden pieces (A–B). The branch If you have built a settlement or city at a harbor Y location,
roads (marked with arrows) are not counted. Emily snags
you can trade more effectively. There are 2 different kinds of
the “Longest Road” special card.
harbor locations:
Generic Harbor (3:1): Here
Illustration I you may exchange 3 identical
resource cards for any 1 other
resource card during your
trade phase.
Example: Brad has a settlement
at a generic harbor. He can, for
instance, exchange 3 lumber cards
for 1 wool card.
Special Harbor (2:1): There is
only 1 special harbor for each
type of resource (with the same
symbol). So, if you earn plenty of
a certain type of resource, it can
be useful to build on the special
harbor for that resource type. The
exchange rate of 2:1 only applies
You can break an opponent’s road by building a settlement on
to the resource shown on the
an unoccupied intersection along that road!
harbor location. A special harbor does not permit you to
Example: In Illustration I, Coleman (the blue player) builds
trade any other resource type at a more favorable rate (not
a settlement on intersection “C” (which is legal). This breaks
even 3:1)!
Emily’s road into 2 parts. Emily must give the special card to
Example: Ron built a settlement at the ore special harbor.
Coleman, who now has the Longest Road (and 2 more VPs).
He may exchange 2 ore cards for any 1 other resource card.
Special Case: If your longest road is broken and you are
He can also trade 4 ore cards for any 2 other cards. If he
tied for longest road, you still keep the “Longest Road” card.
traded 4 wool instead of 4 ore, he would get only 1 card in
However, if you no longer have the longest road, but two or
return.
more players tie for the new longest road, set the “Longest
Road” card aside. Do the same if no one has a 5+ segment
road. The “Longest Road” card comes into play again when only
1 player has the longest road (of at least 5 road pieces).
99
HbmG nataC 5102 ©
© 2015 Catan GmbH © 2015 Catan GmbH
© 2015 Catan GmbH
HbmG nataC 5102 ©
lonGest Road
2 Victory Points!
This card goes to the player with the
longest road of at least 5 segments.
Another player who builds a longer :
road takes this card.
AA
CC
BB
NN RR
numBer toKens resourCe Cards (resourCes)
The 18 number tokens are marked with the There are 5 different types of resources
numerals “2” through “12.” There is only one “2” (see page 3): grain (from fields), brick (from
and one “12.” There is no “7.” hills), ore (from mountains), lumber (from
The more often a number is rolled, the more often each forest), and wool (from pasture). These
associated hex produces resources. Note the size of the resources are represented by “resource
numbers and the dots (pips) beneath the numbers on the cards.” You receive these cards as income
tokens. The taller the number and the larger the quantity of from the resource production of these hexes. Resource
dots, the more likely it is that number will be rolled. “6” and production is determined by the dice roll at the beginning
“8” (the red numbers) are the most frequently rolled numbers. of each turn. You receive your income for each terrain hex
They each have 5 dots, because there are 5 ways to roll these adjacent to your settlements or cities every time the production
numbers on the 2 dice. number on the hex is rolled (exception: see Robber Y).
The letters on the back of the number tokens are only used
resourCe produCtion
during the setup phase (see Set-up, Variable Y).
On your turn, you must roll the dice for the turn’s resource
PP production. The number rolled determines which hexes
produce resources. Each number appears twice—except for
paths “2” and “12,” which only appear once.
Paths are defined as the edges where All players who have settlements Y or cities Y on the hexes
2 hexes and/or hexes and the frame indicated by the roll receive the yields (resource cards) of those
meet. Paths run along the border of hexes. Each settlement produces 1 resource card and each city
2 terrain hexes or between a land hex produces 2 resource cards.
and the frame. Only one road Y can be Example: See Illustration J. Loren, the blue player, rolls a
built on any path. At each end of a path “4,” Her settlement “A” borders a hills hex marked by the
is an intersection Y. number “4,” so she takes a brick card. If settlement “A” had
been a city, she would have received 2 brick cards. Bridget
proGress Cards
owns the red settlement “B” that borders on 2 hexes with the
Progress cards are a type of development card. They have number “4”: hills and pasture. Bridget takes 1 brick card and
green frames. There are 2 each of 3 varieties: 1 wool card from the supply stacks.
Road Building: If you play this card, you may
immediately place 2 free roads on the board
(according to normal building rules).
Year of Plenty: If you play this card you may
immediately take any 2 resource cards from
the supply stacks. You may use these cards to
build in the same turn.
Monopoly: If you play this card, you must
name 1 type of resource. All the other players
must give you all of the resource cards of It is possible that during the game there will not be enough
this type that they have in their hands. If an resources in the bank to supply all of the yields. If there are not
opponent does not have a resource card of enough resource cards to give every player all the production
the specified type, they do not have to give they earn, then no player receives any of that resource that turn.
you anything. Exception: If the shortage of resource cards only affects a
single player, give that player as many of these resources as are
You may play only 1 development card Y during left in the supply, and any extras are lost. In either case,
your turn.
production of other types of resources is not affected.
1100
HbmG
nataC 5102 ©
ROAD BUILDING
Place 2 new roads as if
you had just built them.
HbmG
nataC 5102 ©
YEAR OF PLENTY
Take any 2 resources from
the bank. Add them to
your hand. They can be 2 of the same resource or
2 different resources.
HbmG nataC 5102 ©
88
••••••••••
Illustration J
55 88 44
•••••••• •••••••••• ••••••
AA BB
22 44 33
•• •••••• ••••
MONOPOLY
When you play this card,
announce 1 type of resource.
All other players must give
you all of their resources of that type.
resourCe trade “A” and “B” do not receive a brick resource card. This lasts
until the robber is moved again by another “7” or a knight
In the second phase of your turn, you may trade with
card. Xander may also take 1 resource card at random from
the other players. The other players may not trade among
1 of the players who own settlements “A” or “B”.
themselves, only with the player whose turn it is. There are
2 different kinds of trade: rollinG a “7” and aCtivatinG the roBBer
• Domestic trade Y and
If you roll a “7” for resource production, none of the players
• Maritime trade Y. receive resources. Instead:
(1) Each player counts their resource cards. Any player with
roads
more than 7 resource cards (i.e., 8 or more) must choose
The roads connect your
and discard half of them. Return discards to the supply
settlements and cities. You
stacks. If you hold an odd number of cards, round down
build roads on paths Y. You
(e.g., if you have 9 resource cards, you discard 4).
cannot build new settlements
Example: Alex rolls a “7.” He has only 6 cards in his hand.
without also building roads.
Larry has 8 cards and Will has 11. Larry must discard 4 cards
Roads provide victory points
and Will 5 (rounding down).
only if you hold the Longest
(2) Then you (the player who rolled the “7”) must move
Road Y special card. Only
the robber Y to the number token Y of any other terrain
1 road may be built on each
hex (or to the desert Y hex). This blocks the resource
path. You can build roads Illustration K
production of this hex, until the robber moves to another
along the coast.
number token or the desert.
Example: See Illustration K. Liam, the white player, would
(3) After discarding occurs, you also steal 1 resource card at
like to build a road. He may build (place) his road on any of
random from a player who has a settlement or city adjacent
the paths outlined in green. Each of these paths connects to
to this new hex. If there are 2 or more players with
either Liam’s road or his settlement, and is not blocked by
buildings there, you may choose from which one to steal.
the blue player’s settlement (see the path outlined in red).
The robber must be moved. You may not choose to leave the
roBBer
robber on the same hex.
The robber begins the game in the desert Y. After moving the robber, your turn continues with the trade
It is moved only by rolling a “7” Y or playing phase.
a Knight Y card. RRoobbbbeerr See also Knights Y.
If the robber is moved to any other terrain
SS
hex, it prevents that hex from producing
resources. Players with settlements and/or cities adjacent to the
target terrain hex receive no resources from this hex as long as
settlements
the robber is in the hex. A settlement is worth 1 victory point.
Settlements are built on intersections Y (where
Illustration L 3 hexes meet or 1 or 2 hexes meet the frame).
You share in all of the resource production of
AA each terrain hex adjacent to your settlements.
You must meet 2 conditions when building a settlement:
BB (1) Your settlement must always connect to 1 or more of your
44 JJ own roads Y.
••••••
(2) You must observe the Distance Rule Y. For an example of
the distance rule, see Illustration M on page 12.
Example: See Illustration L. It is Xander’s turn and he rolls a
“7.” He must move the robber. The robber was in a fields hex.
Xander places it on the “4” number token of a hills hex. If a
“4” is rolled in the coming turns, the owners of settlements
1111
Example: See Illustration M. Olivia, the blue player, wants Round One
to build a new settlement. She may only do so at one of the
Each player rolls both dice. The
intersections marked “B”. She cannot build on “A” because
player who rolls highest is the starting
of the Distance Rule, nor on “C” because no blue road leads
player and begins.
to this intersection.
The starting player places a
Illustration M settlement on an unoccupied
intersection Y of their choice, then
places a road adjacent to this settlement.
The other players then follow clockwise.
BB
Everyone places 1 settlement and 1 adjoining road.
CC BB Important: When placing all other settlements, the Distance
Rule Y (see page 7) always applies!
AA AA Round Two
BB Once all players have built their first settlement, the player
who went last in the first round begins round two. That player
builds their second settlement and its adjacent road.
Important: After the starting player builds, the other players
follow counterclockwise, so the starting player in round
one places their second settlement last.
Note: If you have built all 5 of your settlements, you must
The second settlement can be placed on any unoccupied
upgrade 1 of your settlements to a city before you can build
intersection, as long as the Distance Rule is observed. It
another settlement. You will then have the settlement in your
doesn’t have to connect to the first settlement. The second road
supply, so you can build another settlement.
must attach to the second settlement (pointing in any of the 3
set-up phase directions).
Each player receives their starting resources immediately after
Begin the “set-up
phase” after you Illustration N building their second settlement. For each terrain hex adjacent
to this second settlement, take a corresponding resource card
build the game map
from the supply.
(see Illustration
N and Set-up, 11••••00•• 22•• •• 99 •••••• Note: The starting player (the last to place their second
Variable Y). 11••22 •• 66 •••••••• ••44•••• 11••••00•• settlement) begins the game: That player rolls both dice for
resource production. You can find helpful tips about the set-
Everyone chooses
•• 99 •••••• 11••••11 ••33•• •• 88 •••••••• up phase under “Tactics.”
a color and takes the
corresponding game •• 88 •••••••• ••33•• ••44•••• •• 55 •••••• set-up, variaBle
pieces: •• 55 •••••• •• 66 •••••••• 11••••11 Assemble the frame as outlined on pages 2-3.
• 5 settlements;
Note: If you want to vary relative harbor locations slightly,
• 4 cities;
Suggested Beginners’ Map Set-up just shuffle the order of the frame pieces and do not place
• 15 roads; and the random harbor
Illustration O
• 1 building costs card. pieces as outlined
below in point 2.
Sort the resource cards into 5 stacks and place them face up
beside the board. Turn the terrain hexes
face down. Shuffle the
Shuffle the development cards Y and place them face down
terrain hexes.
beside the resource cards.
1. Randomly place
Place the 2 special cards and the dice beside the board.
the terrain tiles face
Place the robber in the desert.
up inside the frame
The set-up phase has 2 rounds. Each player builds 1 road and
arranged as shown in
1 settlement per round.
Illustration O.
1122
2. Now take the TT
Illustration P
9 harbor pieces (the
small 5-sided pieces taCtiCs
with ships on them)
Since you play Catan with a variable map, the tactical
and randomly place
considerations of each game are different. There are,
one on top of each
nevertheless, some common points you should consider:
harbor on the frame.
• Brick and lumber are the most important resources at the
See Illustration P.
beginning of the game. You need both to build roads and
3. Place the 18 number tokens as shown in Illustration Q:
settlements. You should try to place at least 1 of your first
• Sort the number
settlements on a good forest or hills hex.
tokens beside the Illustration Q
• Do not underestimate the value of harbors. For instance, a
board, letter side
player with settlements or cities on productive fields should
face up.
••55•••••• 11••••00•• •• 88 •••••••• try to build a settlement on the “grain” harbor.
• Place 1 token on
each land hex. Start
22•• ••99•••••• ••33•• ••44•••• • Leave enough room to expand when placing your first 2
settlements. Look at your opponents’ sites and roads before
at a corner of the •• 66 •••••••• 11••••11 •• 66 •••••••• 11••••11
making a placement. Beware of getting surrounded! If you
island. Place the ••33•• ••44•••• ••55•••••• 11••22
plan to build toward a harbor, the middle of the island may
number tokens on
•• 88 •••••••• 11••••00•• ••99•••••• be a tricky place for a starting settlement, for it can easily
the terrain hexes in
be cut off from the coast.
alphabetical order,
• The more you trade, the better your chances of victory.
proceeding counter-
Even if it is not your turn, you should offer trades to the
clockwise toward the center. Skip the desert.
current player!
Important: Alternatively, you can use a fully random set-up.
Place 1 token on each land hex. Start at one corner of the
island, and place the number tokens in random order. In
such case, the tokens with the red numbers must not be next
to each other. You may have to swap tokens to ensure that no
red numbers are on adjacent hexes.
Note: The desert never gets a number token. It should be
skipped.
More set-up instructions can be found in “Set-up Phase.” Y
Illustration R
soldier Cards
Some earlier editions of Catan had soldier cards. These are
now called knight cards. See Knight Cards Y.
startinG set-up for BeGinners 11 •••• 00 •• 22•• •• 99 ••••••
D
If you want to use the starting set-up, lay out the board as
HH
shown in Illustration R (and the Game Overview): 11••22
••
66
•••••••• ••
44
••••
11
••••
00
••
HH
• Assemble the frame exactly as shown in Illustration R.
HH
• Place the terrain hexes exactly as shown in Illustration R. •• 99 •••••• HH 11 •••• 11 RRoobbbbeerr •• 33 •• •• 88 ••••••••
• Place 2 settlements and 2 roads of each color as shown.
HH HH
If only 3 are playing, remove the red pieces. 88 33 44 55
•••••••••• •••• •••••• ••••••••
• Each player receives the 3 resources from the terrain hexes
adjacent to their settlement marked by the white star. 55 66 1111
•••••••• •••••••••• ••••
The oldest player is the starting player. The oldest player takes
the first turn and rolls for resource production.
1133
trade viCtory points
After you roll for resource production, you may trade with The first player to reach (be at) 10 victory points (VPs)
other players (domestic trade Y) or with the bank (maritime on their turn wins the game.
trade Y). Players acquire victory points (VPs) for the following:
• You may trade as long as you have resource cards. 1 settlement = 1 VP
• If you decide not to trade during your turn, 1 city = 2 VPs
no one can trade.
Longest Road special card = 2 VPs
• You may trade with another player between your turns,
Largest Army special card = 2 VPs
but only if it is that player’s turn and they elect to trade
Victory point (VP) card = 1 VP
with you.
Since each player begins with 2 settlements, each player
• You may not trade with the bank during another
begins the game with 2 victory points.
player’s turn.
Therefore, you only need 8 more victory points to win the
• You may not give away cards.
game!
• You may not trade development cards.
Hint: In Catan, you will often see an icon of a
• You may not trade like resources (e.g., 2 wool for 1 wool).
rising sun (on VP cards and special VP cards, etc.).
VV This is the VP symbol. It is a visual reminder for the
things, other than settlements and cities, that earn you VPs.
Each VP symbol you see is worth 1 VP.
viCtory point Cards
Victory point cards are development cards Y, so they can
be “bought.” These orange
framed development cards LIBRARY
represent important cultural MARKET
achievements, represented by
c w r w w e e o h i v r n E r e e t s a a t n a h c i t l n h h y 1 y o e b o v u v i u g u i c c a i r o t l t m o d r o v r i i r s e n c y y o ! t g p o m K p s o r . e o e y i e i n o n p p t n t o . c e v i i a Y n c e r o t t l d o s u c e r a i o y s r n d l s y GR HbmG nataC 510 E 1 2 © H A bmG nataC 5102 © T V R tu e 1 i© 2 v r 015 H t C n e c ata h n G a m r b R t H i V e t l e u A f e , q t n o r t v i h w L u n h u e r i c i i r L e e m a s t r i q h f l e t c y n , b u d a t1 o i w u e h t i t r f r r , u rt m i d i P o e R he t r s y r o q r h de o be n V o © f c 2 u 0 y 1 o 5 v v n e C u a a t n i a f p n i i i e G t r m i o b f r H r c u o , i a y , r e d r t c o i P o y l m e w o d n n f v o a u o t t r i t h b i f p c u t y n r o s c o o t . h e h i o t r s r! r y o i i i re 1 n c v o o t r a , a n i t y t u f y c u y c s r r. t R p t r h e d o h r o V t e o q n u e r P o v i ! u y n e n i n i r . i f a t e u c r o , s y a l e w m o c d t t i u h i h b o t n f r i h o e s r r r i t c t o v a , ! y i f r y c d p o t C o o u P o r i n n y r H o . e t y s a o A i c u h n P r E t! L
point cards hidden until you
have 10 points during your
turn and you can declare victory. (You should also reveal them
if someone else wins.)
Hint: Again, keep your victory point cards hidden until the
end of the game. Place them face down in front of you. Of
course, if you have 1 or 2 unused cards face down in front of
you for a long time, the other players will assume that they
are victory point cards.
1144
HbmG nataC
5102 ©
Victory Points in Catan
= 1 VP
UNIVERSITY = 2 VPs 1 Victory Point! Reveal this card on your turn if, with it, you reach
the number of points required for victory. = 2 VPs
= 2 VPs
A general note on Catan rules. This is the 5th English-
= 1 VP
language edition of Catan (aka Settlers of Catan). Over the
years, the rules have been clarified, refined, and occasionally
updated. As of January 1, 2015, all of the rules in this version
of Catan take precedence over any previously-published rules.
HbmG nataC 5102 ©
lonGest Road 2 Victory Points!
This card goes to the player with the
longest road of at least 5 segments.
Another player who builds a longer road takes this card.
laRGest aRmy
2 Victory Points!
The first player to play 3 Knight cards
gets this card. Another player who plays
more Knight cards takes this card.
UNIVERSITY
1 Victory Point!
Reveal this card on your
turn if, with it, you reach
the number of points required for victory.
C a i
redits lmanaC ndex
Designer: Klaus Teuber (klausteuber.com) Entries Page
Original Development: TM-Spiele GmbH
Build (Building) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
5th Ed. Development Team: Pete Fenlon, Arnd Fischer,
Building Costs Cards . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
Ron Magin, Benjamin Teuber, and Guido Teuber
Cities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
Art: Michael Menzel, Pete Fenlon
Coast . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
Art Direction & Graphic Design: Pete Fenlon, Combined Trade/Build Phase . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
Michaela Kienle, and Ron Magin
Desert. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
Production: Ron Magin & Pete Fenlon
Development Cards . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
Special Thanks: Robert T. Carty, Jr., Coleman Charlton, Distance Rule . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
Morgan Dontanville, Alex Colón Hernández, Aud Ketilsdatter
Domestic Trade . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
(LSKC/354-2), Stephanie Newman, Donna Prior and Kelli
Ending the Game . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
Schmitz.
Game Play. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
Original U.S. Product Development: Coleman Charlton, Robert
Harbors. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
T. Carty Jr., Pete Fenlon, Nick Johnson, Will Niebling, William Niebling,
Intersections . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
Guido Teuber, Larry Roznai, and Alex Yeager
With thanks to: Bridget Roznai, Loren Roznai, Schar Niebling, Peter Knight Cards. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
Bromley, Darwin Bromley, Trella Bromley, Bill Wordelmann, Elaine
Largest Army . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
Wordelmann, Lou Rexing, Tom Smith, Keywood Cheeves, Mike Strack,
Benny Teuber, Claudia Teuber, Liam Teuber, Leif Teuber, Emily Johnson, Longest Road . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
Olivia Johnston, Karl Roelofs, Arnd Beenen, Gero Zahn, and Maritime Trade . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
Scott Anderson
Number Tokens. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
Copyright © 2020 Catan GmbH and Catan Studio. Catan,
Paths . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
The Settlers of Catan, the “Catan Sun” logo, the “Glowing Yellow
Progress Cards . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
Sun” and “Catan Board” marks, and all marks herein are
Resource Cards (Resources) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
trademarks of Catan GmbH and are used under license by Catan
Studio. Published by Catan Studio, 1995 W. County Rd. B2, Resource Production . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
Roseville, MN 55113. Phone +1.651.639.1905. Resource Trade . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
Roads . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
You have purchased a game of the highest quality.
Robber . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
However, if you find any components missing
Rolling a “7” and Activating the Robber. . . . . . . . . . 11
or damaged, please visit:
Settlements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
www.catanstudio.com/parts
Set-up Phase . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
For all other inquiries, contact us at:
Set-up, Variable . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
info@catanstudio.com
Soldier Cards . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
Starting Set-up for Beginners . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
Tactics. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
Trade . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
If you would like to Victory Point Cards . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
protect your cards in this Victory Points . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
game, we recommend
Gamegenic card sleeves.
The badge here
indicates what style of Studio
sleeves and the number
™
of packs required to
catanstudio.com catan.com
sleeve all of the cards in
this CATAN expansion.
1155
The island of Catan lies before you. The isle consists of You only collect resources if you own a settlement or city
11 66
19 terrain tiles surrounded by ocean. Your goal is to settle on bordering these terrain hexes. In the illustration, the red
Catan, and expand your territory until it becomes the largest and settlement [A] borders the “10” mountains and orange settlement
most glorious in Catan. [B] borders the “10” hills. If a “10” is rolled, the red player
There are five productive terrain types and one desert on Catan. receives 1 ore card and the orange player receives 1 brick card.
22
Each terrain type produces a different type of resource (The Since the settlements and cities usually border on 2-3 terrain
77
desert produces nothing). Each resource you receive is represented types, they can “harvest” up to 3 different resources based on
by a card. Here’s what each terrain produces: the dice roll. Here, the white settlement [C] borders on forest,
mountains, and pasture. A settlement at [D] would only harvest the
production from 2 terrain hexes (hills and mountains). Finally, a
settlement at [E] would only harvest the production from 1 terrain
hex (pasture). However [E] is also at a wool harbor.
Since it’s impossible for you to have settlements adjacent to
88
Hills Forest Mountains all terrain hexes and number tokens, you may receive certain
Produce Brick Produces Lumber Produce Ore resources only at rare intervals—or never. This is tough, because
building requires specific resource combinations.
For this reason, you can trade with other players. Make them an
99
offer! A successful trade might yield you a big build!
You can only build a new settlement on an unoccupied
1100
intersection if you have a road leading to that intersection and
Fields Pasture Desert
the nearest settlement is at least two intersections away.
Produce Grain Produces Wool Produces Nothing
Carefully consider where you build settlements. The numbers
1111
33 You begin the game with 2 settlements and 2 roads. Each on the round tokens are depicted in varying sizes. They also
settlement is worth 1 victory point. You therefore start the game have dots (pips) below the numbers. The taller the
with 2 victory points! The first player to acquire 10 victory points on depicted number, and the more pips it has, the more
88
their turn wins the game. likely that number is to be
To gain more victory points, you rolled. The red numbers ••••••••••
44
must build new roads and 6 and 8 are the tallest
settlements and upgrade your numbers with the most pips; they
settlements to cities. Each city are likely to be rolled most
is worth 2 victory points. To frequently.
1100 22 99
build or upgrade, you need •••••• A •• •••••••• Bottom line: The more
D
to acquire resources. frequently a number is
B
How do you rolled, the more often
55
HH
acquire 1122 66 44 1100 the hexes with those
resources? It’s •• •••••••••• •••••• •••••• numbers produce
D
HH
simple. Each HHaarrbboorr resources.
IInntteerrsseeccttiioonn
turn, you roll You should
HH
2 dice to 99 1111 33 88 consider
determine •••••••• •••• RRoobbbbeerr PPaatthh •••• •••••••••• settling on
which terrain hexes that have
C
hexes produce good potential for
HH HH
resources. Each 88 33 44 55 production (i.e.
terrain hex is marked •••••••••• •••• •••••• •••••••• 6 and 8 vs. 2 and 12).
E
with a round number However, these same
token. If, for example, a high-producing hexes are
“10” is rolled, all terrain 55 66 1111 often the primary target for
hexes with a “10” number •••••••• •••••••••• •••• the robber.
token produce resources—in
the illustration on the right, those
terrain hexes are a mountains
hex (ore) and a hills hex (brick).
1166
