Klaus Teuber
GG RR
aammee uulleess
aa
&& llmmaannaacc
Dear Knights of Catan,
This booklet contains all of the guidelines you need to play Catan: Cities & Knights . We recommend that you first read
®
the “Game Overview” on the back of these rules. Then read the “Game Rules” to familiarize yourself with the basic changes
in this expansion. Finally, refer to the “Almanac” when special questions arise during play. Also note that the Almanac
includes instructions on how to label the game parts.
You can find further information online at:
catan.com klausteuber.com catanstudio.com
G R
ame ules
Except where noted below, Catan: Cities & Knights (aka “Cities • 4 development flip-charts (“city calendars”)
& Knights”) uses all the rules from Catan ® (aka “The Settlers of • wooden playing pieces in 4 colors:
Catan”). The additional rules include:
– 12 city walls (square wooden tokens; 3 of each color)
• a revised turn order;
– 24 knights (round wooden tokens; 6 of each color)
• rules for placing and using knights;
• 3 metropolis pieces (yellow wooden city gate pieces)
• rules for city development and progress cards; and
• 3 metropolis tokens (die cut cardboard)
• rules for the attacking barbarians!
• 2 sheets of knight labels
These 12-page rules (pages 2-13) contain all the important
• 1 barbarian ship (wooden ship piece)
information that you need to play! Look for specific information
• 1 merchant (wooden cone piece)
about the individual progress cards in the “Almanac,” which
• 1 Game Rules & Almanac booklet
follows after these rules (see pages 14-18).
• 1 game overview (on back of this booklet)
Game Components
• 1 event die (with 3 ships and 3 city gate symbols)
• 1 “barbarian tile” with movement spaces for
the barbarian ship
What You need From Your Catan Game
• 36 commodity cards, including: To play Cities & Knights you will
need most of the components Illustration A
– 12 paper (from forest)
from a copy of Catan. Set aside
– 12 cloth (from pasture)
the following Catan pieces, as you
– 12 coin (from mountains)
won’t need them:
• 54 progress cards: • The development card deck; The first p l 2 l a a y V R e i r G c t t e o o s r p y t l a P y a o i 3 R n K m ts n ! y ight cards
gets this card. Another player who plays
more Knight cards takes this card.
– 18 trade progress cards (yellow flag on the back)
• The “Largest Army” card; and
– 18 politics progress cards (blue flag on the back)
• The building costs cards.
– 18 science progress cards (green flag on the back)
See Illustrations A and B.
• 6 “Defender of Catan” victory point (VP) cards Cities & Knights pieces replace
Set aside all of these
these components. Use all of the Catan pieces before
A general note on Catan rules. This is the 5th English- remaining pieces from Catan. you start—you don’t
language edition of Catan (aka Settlers of Catan). Over the need them in C&K.
years, the rules have been clarified, refined, and occasionally
updated. As of January 1, 2015, all of the rules in this version of
Catan take precedence over any previously-published rules.
The New World is Winter and We create wonders knowing onlee truth transcends decay
22
neW Game pieCes You use the development flip-charts to track the city
improvements that you purchase. Each page of the flip-chart
Progress Cards
shows the building costs of each piece. Each section also shows
In Cities & Knights, these the cost of the next level of improvement. When you buy a
three card decks replace the city improvement, you flip the page section matching the
development card deck from improvement you purchased.
Catan. Illustration B
Each page section depicts an illustration of the improvements
Knights that you’ve purchased, and a number of red dice. These red
dice tell you if you acquire progress cards. The third level of
Before you play Cities & Knights for the first time, you need to
improvement in each category describes the special ability
label all 24 knight tokens (the round wooden “disks”). There are
you’ve just earned for that development track.
6 tokens of each color.
There are 6 knights per player (color): City Walls
• 2 basic knights City walls are low, square wooden
(1 ring, open helmet) KniGhts blocks that you can place beneath your
Inactive Active
• 2 strong knights cities. To build a city wall, you pay 2
(2 rings, full helmet) brick resources to the bank. Each city wall you have on the board
increases the maximum number of cards you can safely hold in
• 2 mighty knights (3 rings,
your hand when a “7” is rolled on the production dice. Each city
great-helm with crest)
wall adds 2 cards to your “safe” hand limit.
You need to attach 2 labels to
You may only build a city wall under a city. You can not
each knight token. Label each
place a city wall under a settlement. If one of your cities with
tokes as shown in illustration
a city wall is reduced to a settlement (by the barbarians), you
C. The front side of each token
must also remove that city wall from the board. Also, you may
gets the “inactive” symbol
only build 1 city wall under a given city, and you can have a
(a black & white image), the
maximum of 3 city walls on the board at any given time.
reverse side of each token gets
the “active” symbol (a full- Illustration C settinG up the island oF Catan
color head).
Normally, you play Cities & Knights on a random, variable
Important: Make sure to affix the correct stickers to each token.
game board, just like the Catan base game. However, we
The “inactive” front and “active” back of each token must be
recommend that you use the prepared board set-up shown
a knight of matching level. For example, inactive basic on the
in Illustration D (see page 4), it’s ideal for your first game of
front, active basic on the back, etc.
Cities & Knights. This layout provides a balanced production of
Development Flip-chart
resources (most especially grain) and commodities that may
Before playing your first game, you must separate the spiral- prove scarce during the game.
bound pages of the development flip-charts. Each page of the
Hexagon Tiles and the Barbarian Tile
flip-charts is perforated, so there are 3 parts to each page. Gently
After constructing the frame, place the hexagonal tiles (hexes)
pull the sections of each page apart. When finished, you should
within the frame as shown in the Game Overview.
have 5 pages, each divided into 3 separate sections.
If you are constructing a random
board, place the land hexes in the
center of the framed area as you
would normally.
Next, place the “barbarian tile”
as noted. The barbarian ship will
move along this track toward
Catan. Again, if using a random
board, shuffle the harbor tokens
and place them normally.
33
settinG up the Game Place the robber on the desert hex.
Sort the resource cards into 5 stacks, 1 for each resource. Place Each player selects a color and takes all of the pieces of that
them face-up near the island. color. Each player receives:
Sort the new commodity cards into 3 stacks, one for each • 5 settlements, 4 cities, and 15 roads
commodity. Place them face-up by the resource cards. (all from the Catan base game);
Divide the progress cards into 3 stacks by the flag color on the • 6 knights (2 each of basic, strong, and mighty knights);
back of each card (green, blue, and yellow). Shuffle each stack • 3 city walls; and
separately and place them face down near the island. • 1 development flip-chart.
Place the 3 metropolises, the merchant cone, the 3 dice
set-up phase
(1 yellow, 1 red, and 1 event die), and the “Longest Road” card
near the island. Once you’ve constructed the board and arranged the pieces,
begin the set-up phase. Now the players place their initial
Place the black wooden ship on the “barbarian ship” space on
settlements, cities, and roads. Each player rolls the dice; the
the Barbarian Tile. The barbarian ship moves along this track on
player with the highest roll begins.
its way to Catan.
Starting with the first player and continuing clockwise around
the table, each player places 1
Place the barbarian settlement and 1 road (as in basic
Starting Map
ship here. Catan).
for Beginners
Then, the second placement
Beginners should set up Place the barbarian tile round begins with the last player
the game according to beside the board. to place a settlement. It continues
the example shown here. counterclockwise around the
table (so the first player to place
a settlement will be the last to
place). Each player now places 1
city and 1 road, following all of
the normal rules for placement
described in the Catan base game
66 22 55
•••••••••• •• •••••••• (i.e., no city may be placed fewer
than 2 spaces away from all
settlements, etc.).
33 99 1100 You receive your first
•••• •••••••• ••••••
resources immediately after you
place your city. You get 1 resource
88 44 1111 33 88 for each terrain that your city is
•••••••••• •••••• •••• •••• •••••••••• adjacent to.
Place your development flip-
chart in front of you with the
1100 55 66 44
•••••• •••••••• •••••••••• •••••• first page showing (indicating
that you have not built any city
improvements).
99 1122 1111
•••••••• •• ••••
Illustration D
44
turn overvieW Example: See Illustration
F. The event die shows a
The player who placed the last city takes the first turn;
yellow gate, and the red
afterwards, in clockwise direction, one by one the other players
die shows the number
take their turns. On your turn, the following actions are
“1.” All those players
performed, in the order listed:
who have purchased at
• You roll all 3 dice.
least the first level yellow
• The results of the event (symbol) die are resolved. city improvement (the
• Progress cards may be drawn (depending on the result of market) are eligible to
the event die). draw a yellow progress Illustration F
• All players produce the resources indicated by the red and card.
yellow dice. Beginning with the player whose turn it is, and continuing
• All players produce the commodities indicated by the red clockwise, each eligible player draws the topmost card from
and yellow dice. the progress card stack that matches the color of the city
• You may do any or all of the following in any order: gate showing on the event die. Keep your progress cards
– Trade resources and/or commodities with the bank and/ secret from your opponents until you play them. You may
or other players. never have more than 4 progress cards in your hand. See
– Build roads, settlements, cities, knights, city walls, and/ “Progress Cards” on page 9.
or city improvements.
• Add the red and the yellow dice together to determine
– Activate, promote, and/or perform actions with your
which hexes produce resources and commodities for
knights.
all players. All hexes whose number matches this sum
– Play any number of progress cards.
produces 1 of the appropriate resources for each
Note: The “Alchemist” progress card can only be played before settlement adjacent to it. Production for a city bordering
the dice are rolled. It is the only progress card that can be used
a producing hex depends on the type of terrain rolled. See
before the dice are rolled and the results resolved.
Illustration J.
speCiFiC aCtions As in Catan base game, any hex that is occupied by the robber
does not produce any resources or
Dice Rolls commodities. Also, if a “7” is rolled
Each player begins their turn by rolling on the dice, no hexes produce:
all 3 of the dice. The result of the dice will instead, the player who rolled the
determine not only which terrain hexes
“7” must move the robber and
produce resources and commodities, but also what actions the
may be able to steal 1 card from
barbarians will take, and if any progress cards are drawn. The
any opponent whose settlement or
effects of the die roll must be resolved in a specific order:
city is adjacent to the robber. The
• First, use the event die to determine what event takes place
robber cannot be moved until after
that turn. the barbarians reach the island of
• If the ship symbol is showing, then move the Catan for the first time. Until the
barbarian ship 1 space closer to the island of
first barbarian attack, if you roll
Catan. The ship follows the track on the
a “7”, all players must check if
Barbarian Tile. The ship begins its journey on the
they are holding too many cards
space illustrated with the ship. The barbarians
as usual; however, you do not
attack when the ship reaches the last space. (See “Attack
move the robber from the desert
of the Barbarians” on page 11.)
and you do not steal a card from
• If one of the three city gate symbols (blue, green, or
another player. Further, you are
yellow) is showing, then all players may be
not allowed to move the robber by
eligible to draw a progress card. To be eligible,
playing of any progress cards (like a player must be able to match the number
the Bishop) or knight actions until
rolled on the red die with one of the red die icons
showing on their flip-chart in the section that matches the after the first barbarian attack.
color of the city gate rolled on the symbol die
(see example).
55
HbmG nataC 5102 ©
1 Wool + 1 Cloth
HbmG nataC 5102 ©
1 Lumber + 1 Paper
HbmG nataC 5102 ©
1 Ore + 1 Coin
HbmG nataC 5102 © HbmG nataC 5102 ©
2 Brick
HbmG nataC 5102 © HbmG nataC 5102 ©
Cities Produce
Resource &
Commodity Cards
A City on a: Produces
2 Grain
Illustration G
Trading and Building Reminder: See Illustration H. The open-face helmet and single
In Cities & Knights, you are allowed to build and trade any ring denotes a “basic knight.” The full helmet surrounded by
a pair of rings indicates a “strong knight.” The great-helm
number of times and in any order. You do not need to finish all
adorned with the glowing sun and trio of rings represents a
of your trading before you begin your building. All of the rules
“mighty knight.”
from Catan apply to trades made in Cities & Knights (with the
addition of the commodity cards). Progress cards may never be If you wish to “hire” a knight, you must pay one wool and one
traded at any time. ore to the bank. This allows you to take a basic knight (open
helmet/one ring) and place it on the board. Newly placed knights
All of the basic rules for building remain in effect. The cost
are always placed with the inactive side up. You may place your
of roads, settlements, and cities remain unchanged. There are,
knight on any unoccupied intersection connected to your roads.
however, 2 new items that you may elect to build during your
There are 2 special purchases you can make once you have a
turn. Also, you may no longer purchase development cards with
knight:
resources.
Activating a Knight
The 2 new items are city walls and knights.
In order for a knight to take an action, it must first be
City Walls
activated. To activate a knight, you must pay one grain to the
To build a city wall, you must pay two brick resources to the
bank. Then you may turn the knight token over to the active
bank. Place the city wall (the square wooden piece) under any
side, which depicts the helmet in color. The strength of the
city you own on the board. There are three restrictions on the
knight does not affect the cost to activate it. It costs only one
placement of city walls:
grain, regardless of whether it is a basic knight, or a mighty
a. You may only build city walls under cities—never
knight. A knight may be activated on the same turn it was built;
under settlements.
however, the knight may not perform an action on that same
b. You may only build one city wall under each city. turn.
c. You may never have more than 3 city walls at one time. Promoting a Knight
Each city wall you control increases the maximum number of You can increase the strength and effectiveness of your knights
cards you safely hold in your hand when a “7” is rolled on the by paying additional resources. The cost to promote a basic
production dice. Each city wall adds 2 cards to this limit. knight to a strong knight or a strong knight to a mighty knight
Example: If you have 2 cities, each with a city wall, you may is one wool and one ore. When you promote a knight, return the
safely hold up to 11 cards in your hand without having to old knight token (which may be repurchased later) and replace
discard half of them when a “7” is rolled. it with a token showing the next higher strength level. The new,
If the barbarians pillage your city (i.e., reduce it to a stronger knight must be placed in the same location as the
settlement), the city wall is also destroyed. You must remove the knight you have promoted. The status of the knight, active or
city wall from the board. inactive, is not changed when you promote the knight. You may
Knights promote a knight on the same turn that it was originally built,
or on any later turn. A knight may only be promoted once per
Knights are represented
turn. You may only promote a strong knight to a mighty knight
by the round wooden tokens.
after you have purchased the third level of the politics (blue) city
Each knight token is labeled BasiC KniGht
Value = 1 improvement (the “Fortress”).
on both sides. One side—
showing the symbol of a Playing Progress Cards
knight’s helmet in black During your turn, after you have rolled the dice, you may play
and white—is the inactive stronG KniGht any number of progress cards in any order. You may play them
Value = 2
side. An inactive knight may between other actions taken during your turn. When you play a
not perform any actions. progress card, resolve all of its effects, then place it, face down,
The other side of the token, under the progress card stack of the matching color.
which depicts the helmet
miGhtY KniGht
For more information about progress cards, see “Progress
Value = 3
in color, is the active side. Cards” on page 9 or consult the Cities & Knights Almanac.
The type of helmet and the
number of rings indicate the Illustration H
strength of the knight.
66
Commodities CitY improvements
In Cities & Knights, we’ve added 3 new, “refined” materials to One of your most important considerations as a prince
the game (see Illustration I). As in Catan, we refer to the 5 basic of Catan is the continued improvement of your cities. This
materials (lumber, wool, grain, brick, and ore) as “resources.” improvement is made possible through the use of commodity
The 3 new materials (cloth, coin, and paper) are called cards. You are able to improve your cities in three areas of
“commodities.” In many ways, the commodities are treated the development: trade (yellow); politics (blue); and science (green).
same as resources, but there are also some ways in which they You may purchase improvements in all 3 areas even if you own
differ. Here are all of the details about commodities: only 1 city.
Your city improvements are tracked with your development
flip-chart. Your flip-chart is divided into 3 separate parts,
1 for each of the 3 areas of development. Each section has
5 pages, which correspond to the 5 levels of improvement
you can acquire in each area. At the beginning of the game,
open page 1 of your flip-chart; the page indicates that you have
no improvements.
The various improvements are represented by important
buildings that can be constructed in your cities, such as a
market, a cathedral, or a library. The cost of a building is shown
in the lower right corner of each flip-chart page.
Example: See Illustration J. The market costs 1 cloth.
Pay 1 cloth and flip the Market section of your development
flip-chart.
• Commodities are produced only by cities, and only in forest,
pasture, and mountains.
• Commodities, when produced, are added to your hand of
resource cards. They count toward the robber or limit when
a “7” is rolled. They may be stolen by the robber, or lost as
a discard.
• The borders on commodity cards are intertwined with
ribbons that match the color of the commodity (gold
for cloth, green for paper, and gray for coin). The borders
on the resource cards all are plain knot work. Both
commodity cards and resource cards have the same card
backs (i.e., a map).
• Commodities may be traded in all the same ways as
resources. You may trade them freely with other players.
The first improvement in each area always costs 1 commodity
You may exchange 4 of the same commodity for 1 of any
of the matching type. The second improvement in each
resource or commodity you choose. If you have a settlement
area costs 2 of that commodity. The cost of each subsequent
or a city on a 3:1 harbor, you may trade 3 of any commodity
improvement is again increased by 1.
for 1 of any resource or commodity of your choice. You
may also trade 4 of any resource for 1 of any commodity There is one restriction on the purchase of improvements,
you choose (3:1 at a harbor; 2:1 if you have the matching however. If you have no cities on the board (because the
special harbor). barbarians have pillaged your last city), you may not purchase
• You need commodities to acquire city improvements. any city improvements until you have built at least 1 city. (See
• Some progress cards specifically mention “resources” or “Attack of the Barbarians” on page 11.)
“commodities.” These cards can only affect the type of Each improvement increases your chance of being eligible to
material they specifically mention. draw progress cards. Each improvement shows a picture of the
improvement. Above that picture is a row of red dice.
77
HbmG nataC 5102 © HbmG nataC 5102 ©
5 Resource Card Types
HbmG nataC 5102 © HbmG nataC 5102 © HbmG nataC 5102 ©
3 Commodity Card Types
Illustration I
Illustration J
Each die shows a number. If the event die roll shows a city gate, the metropolis
you may draw a progress card of like color—but only if the
Building city improvements is
number on the red die matches one of the dice pictured on that
also important if you want to have a
color’s section on your development flip-chart. A higher level of
metropolis. A metropolis is represented
improvement increases your chance to draw progress cards.
by a yellow city gate. These gates
Example: See Illustration K. If you have built the market are designed to fit over the wooden
improvement, it shows 2 red dice. If the event die rolls the
city pieces.
yellow city gate, and the red die shows a “1” or “2,” then you
Only 3 metropolises may be in play at any given time: one
may draw a yellow progress card.
each for trade, politics, and science.
In addition,
The first player who achieves the fourth level of improvement
when you
in any one of these 3 areas (the bank, the cathedral, or the
build the third
theater) may place one of the metropolis gates on any one of
improvement in
their own cities on the board. You may take the metropolis only
each area, you
if no other player already controls the fourth level improvement
receive a special
of that color, for there can be only 1 metropolis for science,
ability. You are
trade, or politics. When you acquire a metropolis, place the
able to use this
metropolis token of the appropriate color on your flip-chart to
ability for the
show which area is associated with your metropolis.
remainder of
A city with a metropolis is worth a total of 4 victory points!
the game, even
This includes 2 points for the city and 2 additional points for
if other players
the metropolis.
also achieve the Illustration K
third level of You may take another player’s metropolis if you are able to
improvement (in which case they also get the advantage) acquire the fifth level of improvement in the matching color
or if you purchase improvements beyond the third level. before they do. If another player reaches the fifth level of
The advantage that you gain from each color of improvement improvement before the metropolis owner does, that player
is different: may take both the metropolis piece and the colored
metropolis token.
• Trading House (yellow): You may trade commodities (of
the same type) 2:1 for any commodity or resource. You may If you have reached the fifth level of improvement in any area,
make this trade only during your turn, as if you were using no player may take your metropolis away.
a harbor. This special trade advantage does not include A metropolis is immune to the barbarians. It can never be
resources, only the three commodities. pillaged or reduced. However, the metropolis is counted when
• Fortress (blue): You may promote strong knights to mighty determining the strength of the barbarian army.
knights after you have built the fortress. You must still pay You may build more than one metropolis. If you are the first
to promote the knights normally. player to reach the fourth level of improvement in more than
• Aqueduct (green): If, when the dice are rolled for one area (or if you reach the fifth level, thereby taking another
production, you do not receive any resources or player’s metropolis away), you may place another metropolis
commodities, you may take any one resource of your choice gate on one of your cities. But, you may not purchase any
from the bank. You many not, however, use this ability when improvements beyond the third level of a given color unless you
a “7” is rolled. have a city where you could build a metropolis. If you do not
have such a city on the board, you must wait until you have built
at least one more city.
Illustration L 3 City Improvements
88
proGress Cards • You may never hold more than four progress cards in your
hand. If you draw a fifth progress card, and you cannot play
In Cities & Knights,
it because it is not your turn, you must discard one card (of
progress cards replace
your choice) to the bottom of the appropriate stack.
the development
• Progress cards may be played on the same turn they
cards from the Catan
are drawn.
base game. You don’t
• Progress cards may not be traded with other players, nor
purchase progress
may the robber steal them.
cards like development • When you play a progress card, place it face down under cards; instead you draw the appropriate progress card stack. Victory points, however,
them with the right
remain face-up and in play.
combination of event die
and red die. KniGhts
Acquiring Progress Cards Knights are essential for achieving victory in Cities & Knights
To be able to draw a progress card: of Catan. Without them, the barbarians will surely pillage your
• You must possess at least one level of city improvement cities and ruin your hopes for victory.
in one or more areas of development. The first level of Like settlements, knights are placed at the intersection of three
improvement displays two red dice, the second level displays hexes. However, knights do not have to observe the distance rule.
three, and so on. Knights can be placed to block construction of other players, and
• The event die, when rolled on any player’s turn, must they can also be used to break another player’s “longest road.”
show the city gate symbol matches the color of one of Example: See Illustration N. A knight placed at the
your city improvements. intersection of two players’ roads will keep the opposing
• The number on the red die, rolled at the same time, player from
must match one of the red dice displayed on your city building past
improvement matching the color of the city gate on the the knight. The
symbol die. red player has
If these three conditions are met, you may draw the top card four available
from the progress card stack that matches the color of the city intersections for
gate on the event die. If more than one player is allowed to knight placement
draw on the same turn, then each player draws in turn order, (marked with
beginning with the player who rolled the dice this turn. arrows). If Red
places a knight at
Example: Player A rolls a “6” on the yellow die, a “3” on the
red die, and the yellow city gate on the event die. Player B intersection “A,”
has already built a town hall (blue) and a merchant guild Blue will not be
(yellow). Since player B’s yellow improvement shows a red die able to build past
with “3,” showing player B may draw a yellow that knight. Only Red can build a road there. If Red places her
progress card. knight at “B,” it will break Blue’s road–thus shortening it for
Playing Progress Cards purposes of determining the longest road.
During your turn, you may play as many progress cards There are 3 strengths of knights: basic knights, strong
as you wish. All progress cards may only be played after you knights, and mighty knights. A basic knight has a strength of 1,
roll the dice (exception: the “Alchemist”). Here are some a strong knight has a strength of 2, and a mighty knight has a
specific rules about the play of progress cards. More detailed strength of 3.
instructions about each card can be found in the Cities & Knights serve you in 2 ways. First, they help protect Catan
Knights Almanac: from the barbarian army (See “Attack of the Barbarians” on
• Victory point cards must be played immediately when page 11). Second, your active knights can perform one action
drawn. The Spy may not steal them, and they cannot be during your turn. Each knight may perform any 1 of the actions
hidden in your hand. These cards do not count toward your each turn. A knight may not be activated and then perform
hand limit of 4 cards. an action on the same turn. A knight can, however, perform
99
HbmG nataC 0202 ©
MASTER MERCHANT
Select an opponent who has more victory points than you. You may examine their hand of resource and commodity cards and select any 2 cards, which you may add to your hand. HbmG nataC 0202 ©
DIPLOMAT
You may remove any open road (a road with nothing attached at one end). If you remove one of your own roads, you may place it in another location. HbmG nataC 0202 ©
IRRIGATION
You may take 2 grain cards from the bank for each fi elds hex which is adjacent to at least one of your cities or settlements.
Trade Politics Science
Illustration M
BB
AA
Illustration N
an action and then be activated again later on the same turn After you displace an opponent’s knight, move your
(although this knight cannot perform another action on the (displacing) knight to the displaced knight’s former intersection.
same turn). When a knight performs an action, turn the knight Your knight is then turned over to it’s inactive side.
token over to the inactive side. To activate that knight again, you Example: See Illustration P. Red is at it again! She moves
must pay one grain. her strong knight to the intersection indicated by the red
Here are all of the actions that you may perform with an active arrow. Red may do this because her knight is stronger than
knight: Blue’s (basic) knight (note the number of rings), and Red
Moving a Knight has a road that connects the two intersections. Blue must now
move his displaced knight to “A” or “B,” which are
You may move an active knight to another intersection. In
both connected to
order for the knight to move, you must have built roads linking
the knight’s original
the intersection the knight is moving from to the intersection
position by roads. Blue
that it is moving to.
moves his knight to “B.” AA BB
An intersection may only be occupied by one knight at a
Note that “C” is not a
time. However, a moving knight may pass through any number
connected site, so he CC
of intersections that are occupied by pieces of the same color
cannot move to that
(assuming that they are all connected by roads, as above).
spot.
After you have moved the knight, it becomes inactive.
Chasing Away the
If you wish to build a settlement on an intersection occupied
Robber
by one of your knights, then you must first move the knight. If Illustration P
there is no empty intersection for you to move your knight to, You may use one of
then it may not move and you may not build at that intersection. your active knights to chase away the robber. Any knight may
do so, regardless of its strength. A knight may only chase away a
Example: See Illustration O. Red may elect to move her active
knight from intersection “A” to either intersection marked robber if the robber is on one of the three hexes adjacent to that
with an arrow. The knight.
knight may not be
When you chase away the robber, move it to any numbered
moved to “B” or
hex and steal one resource from any player who has a settlement
“C,” as red does BB
or city adjacent to that hex (as if you had played a knight card
not have roads CC
from the Catan base game development deck). After you chase
connecting these
away the robber, your knight is turned over to its inactive side.
intersections to “A.”
Displacing a Knight Example: See Illustration Q. Red’s knight can only chase
AA away the robber from the gray hexes. In order for Red to
On your turn, you
may move one of chase away the robber, she must first move her knight to
your active knights to intersection “A” or “B” (which makes the knight inactive).
an intersection that Then Red must pay one grain to activate her knight. On a
Illustration O
is occupied by one of future turn, she could then use this knight to chase away the
your opponent’s knights. This is called “displacing” a knight. You robber.
may only displace a knight if it is weaker than the knight that
you are moving. Thus, a strong knight can only displace a basic attaCK oF the
knight, and a mighty knight may displace a basic or a strong BarBarians! AA
knight. A basic knight may never displace another knight. BB
Catan is in constant
The owner of the displaced knight must move this knight to
danger of attack from
any empty intersection that is connected, by roads, to the place
the barbarians that live
from which it was displaced. The status of the displaced knight
across the sea. Each turn
(active or inactive) does not change.
the event die shows a
If there is no empty intersection for the displaced knight to
black ship, the barbarian
move to, it is removed from the board.
navy moves one space Illustration Q
You may not displace your own knights.
closer towards Catan.
1100
When the ship reaches the red-circled space that depicts Example: Players A and B each have two cities. Player C has
barbarians landing on the shore, only a metropolis, and player D has only settlements. The
the barbarians attack Catan! barbarians attack, and their strength is 5 (i.e., 4 cities plus 1
metropolis). Players A, B, and D each have one simple knight
When the barbarians attack, follow
activated, and player C has no active knights. Therefore, the
these steps:
knights defend with a strength of 3. Since the knights are
Determine the Barbarians’
weaker, the barbarians win and Catan loses. Because of
Strength the loss, players A and B each lose one of their cities. Player
The strength of the barbarians C cannot lose anything because she has only a metropolis.
is equal to the number of cities Similarly, player D has no cities to lose. Even though C
(including metropolises) owned by contributed fewer knights than all the other players, since she
all players. Add up all of the cities owned by all of the players is immune to the attack it is the next smallest contributor who
anywhere on the island to determine this strength. thus suffers the effects of the barbarians.
• If the knights have a strength equal to or greater than the
Determine the Strength of Catan’s Knights
barbarians, the knights win and Catan is saved! The player
All active knights of all players (even those who do not own
with the highest total strength of active knights (this will
any cities) will defend against the barbarians. Only the active
not always be the greatest number
knights are counted, the inactive knights do not assist in
of knights) will be declared the
defending the island in any way. Remember that the strength
“Defender of Catan!” As a reward,
of each knight is based upon its type: basic (1), strong (2),
that player is presented with one
or mighty (3). Sum up the value of all the active knights to
“Defender of Catan” victory point
determine the strength of the defending army.
(VP) cards. Each VP card is worth
Compare Attackers’ and Defenders’ Strengths
1 VP and is placed face-up in front
There are 2 possible outcomes of this battle: of the player. If 2 or more players
• If the barbarians are stronger, they are victorious! If the tie for the highest total strength
barbarians win the battle, they pillage one or more cities. of knights, no player is declared
Pillaged cities are reduced to settlements (replace the city Defender of Catan, and no one
piece with a settlement). The barbarians pillage one city receives a VP card. Instead, each of
belonging to the player who had the lowest total strength of the players who tie for the highest
active knights when the barbarians attacked. Any player who strength draws the top card from
contributed no knights are automatically considered to have any 1 of the 3 progress card stacks 1
the lowest total strength of active knights. If various players (his choice). In clockwise order, Victory Point
tie for having the lowest total strength of active knights, each eligible player selects 1 card,
each of those players loses 1 of their own cities. starting with the player who rolled
Important: When determining which player has contributed the dice this turn.
the weakest group of knights, do not count any player who Barbarians Return Home
has no cities or any player who has only metropolises. These
Regardless of the outcome of the attack, the barbarian ship
players are immune to the effects of the barbarian attack.
is returned to its starting position. All knights on the board
If the barbarians pillage a city that has a city wall, the city
are turned so that their inactive (black & white) side faces up.
wall is destroyed and removed from the board.
Starting with the next player’s turn, the barbarians will begin a
new journey to the rich island of Catan.
1111
HbmG
nataC
0202
©
DEFENDER OF CATAN
Victory Point Card
(Back & Front)
Losing Your Last City
If you are unfortunate enough to have your last city
pillaged by the barbarians, you are allowed to keep any city
improvements that you may have built before the attack. You
also keep all of your progress cards. You may continue to draw
and play progress cards normally. Note, however, that you may
not build any additional city improvements until you have built
at least one city. Once you own a city again, you may continue to
purchase city improvements normally.
the merChant
The merchant piece is put into play whenever any player uses
one of the “Merchant” progress cards (from the yellow stack). If
you play one of these cards, you may place the merchant piece on any land hex adjacent to one of your cities or settlements.
Until another merchant card is played, you may trade the
resource (not commodity) that is produced in that land hex at a
2:1 rate. All of the normal rules for trading at a 2:1 harbor are in
effect for these trades.
Note: In addition, as long as you retain control of the
merchant, you receive 1 victory point!
If another merchant card is played, whoever played that card
(it could be you) takes control of the merchant. If you played
that card, you may move the Merchant to any hex adjacent to one of your settlements or cities. You receive the trade benefit,
and gets the bonus victory point.
endinG the Game
The first player to accumulate 13 or more victory points during their turn immediately wins the game. This player
becomes the “Lord of All Catan” and receives the endless praise
and love of all the people of Catan!
1122
HbmG nataC 0202 ©
CONSTITUTION
1 Victory Point! Reveal this card immediately when you draw it. This card cannot be stolen by a spy.
HbmG nataC 0202 ©
SABOTEUR
Each player who has as many or more victory points than you must discard half of their own cards to the bank (resource and/or commodity).
HbmG nataC 0202 ©
WARLORD
You may activate all of your knights for free.
HbmG nataC 0202 ©
RESOURCE MONOPOLY
Name a resource (brick, grain, ore, lumber, or wool). Each opponent must give you 2 cards of that type (if they have any).
HbmG nataC 0202 ©
MERCHANT FLEET
For the rest of your turn, you may trade one resource or commodity of your choice with the bank at a 2:1 rate. You may make as many trades as you wish.
HbmG nataC 0202 ©
ROAD BUILDING
When you play this card, you may place 2 roads for free (if playing with Catan: Seafarers, you may place 2 ships or 1 ship and 1 road instead).
HbmG nataC 0202 ©
ENGINEER
You may build 1 city wall for free.
HbmG nataC 0202 ©
IRRIGATION
You may take 2 grain cards from the bank for each fi elds hex which is adjacent to at least one of your cities or settlements.
HbmG nataC 0202 ©
ALCHEMIST
Play this card before you
roll the dice. You decide
what the results of both
numbered dice will be. Then roll the event die normally. Resolve the event die fi rst.
HbmG nataC 0202 ©
DESERTER
Choose 1 opponent. They must remove 1 knight of their choice from the board. You may place 1 of your own knights on the board (its strength must be equal to the knight removed).
HbmG nataC 0202 ©
INTRIGUE
You may displace one of your opponent’s knights, without using a knight of your own. The knight must be on an intersection connected to one of your roads or lines of ships.
HbmG nataC 0202 ©
DIPLOMAT
You may remove any open road (a road with nothing attached at one end). If you remove one of your own roads, you may place it in another location.
HbmG nataC 0202 ©
TRADE MONOPOLY
Name a commodity (cloth, coin, or paper). Each opponent must give you 1 card of that type (if they have any).
HbmG nataC 0202 ©
COMMERCIAL HARBOR
You may offer each opponent 1 resource card from your hand. In exchange, each player must give you 1 commodity card of their choice. If they have none, your resource card is returned.
HbmG nataC 0202 ©
SMITH
You may promote up to 2 of your knights for free (the normal rules for promoting knights still apply). Mighty knights may not be promoted.
HbmG nataC 0202 ©
INVENTOR
You may swap 2 number
tokens of your choice on the game board. You may not choose any 2, 12, 6, or 8 tokens.
HbmG nataC 0202 ©
MINING
You may take 2 ore cards from the bank for each mountains hex adjacent to at least one of your cities or settlements.
HbmG nataC 0202 ©
SPY
Examine an opponent’s hand of progress cards. You may take 1 card of your choice and add it to your hand.
HbmG nataC 0202 ©
WEDDING
Each player who has more victory points than you must give you 2 cards of their choice (resource and/or commodity).
HbmG nataC 0202 ©
BISHOP
Move the robber. You may draw 1 random card (resource or commodity) from the hand of each player who has a settlement or city adjacent to the robber’s new hex.
HbmG nataC 0202 ©
MASTER MERCHANT
Select an opponent who has more victory points than you. You may examine their hand of resource and commodity cards and select any 2 cards, which you may add to your hand.
HbmG nataC 0202 ©
MERCHANT
Place the merchant on a land hex next to your settlement or city. While the merchant remains here, you may trade the resource produced by this terrain at a 2:1 ratio.
HbmG nataC 0202 ©
MEDICINE
For 2 ore and 1 grain, you may upgrade one of your settlements into a city.
HbmG nataC 0202 ©
PRINTER
1 Victory Point!
Reveal this card immediately when you draw it. This card cannot be stolen by a spy.
HbmG nataC 0202 ©
Progress
Cards
CRANE
One city improvement (abbey, town hall, etc.) that you build this turn costs one less commodity than usual. SScciieennccee
TTrraaddee
PPoolliittiiccss
See the Almanac on pages 14-18 for card details.
HbmG
nataC 0202 ©
MERCHANT
Place the merchant on a
land hex next to your settlement
or city. While the merchant
remains here, you may trade
the resource produced by this
terrain at a 2:1 ratio. Merchant Card Merchant Piece
(Front & Back)
variants and optional rules KniGht-errant variant
This rule allows you to use one of your active knights to chase
These rules are strictly optional and should only be used if
away the robber before rolling the dice on your turn. Your knight
agreed on by all players before the game begins.
becomes deactivated. (See Illustration R.) This has the same
seaFarers oF Catan variant effect as playing a knight card before rolling in the Catan base
You may use the Catan: Seafarers Expansion along with the game.
Cities & Knights Expansion. The best scenarios to use are those
that do not involve the exploration of hidden portions of the Illustration R
board (such as “The Fog Islands”) or many small islands (such
as “The Four Islands”), as these types of scenarios may make it
too difficult to combat the barbarian army. Scenarios such as
“Heading for New Shores,” or “Through the Desert” both work
very well with the new rules included in Cities & Knights. If you
choose to play Cities & Knights with the Seafarers, here are some 88
••••••••••
important rules:
• All rules in Cities & Knights that concern “roads” also apply
Red player
to “ships” as well. uses knight to
• When the barbarians attack, they are assumed to attack all 44 move robber
•••••• from the “8”
the islands, counting all cities and knights on all of them.
hex to the
• Knights may be moved across sea hexes if roads and ships “4” hex.
connect the intersection the knight starts from to the
intersection it is moved to. easY start variant
• You may move a knight to an intersection of sea hexes (but
Many players, especially those new to the game, find it difficult
not place a new knight there) if you have a line of ships
to get started if a lot of “7”s are rolled and/or the barbarians
to that intersection. The knight is considered to be on the
strike early. For these players, or for players who wish a friendlier
adjacent ship.
game, use these rules:
• A knight must always be connected to a settlement or city
• If any player rolls a “7” on that player’s first two turns, they
of its color. If you have a knight at sea, or across the sea on
should re-roll. Continue rolling until a result other than “7”
another island, you may not move any ships if they would
is obtained. Beginning with the first player’s 3rd turn, all of
break this connection (the route is considered “closed”).
the normal rules for rolling a “7” apply.
• You can use a knight on a sea hex intersection to chase
• Do not roll the event die during the first two turns of each
away the pirate, just as you would chase away the robber.
player. The barbarian ship does not move, and no player
nastY variant For experienCed plaYers draws any progress cards during this time. Starting with the
first player’s third turn, roll all three dice and resolve
This rule adds a new level of strategy and politics to the battle
them normally.
between the barbarians and the knights. Be warned: Using this
This variant is designed to give all players a chance to
rule can make the game very nasty (and longer as well).
get “rolling” at the beginning of the game without being
When the barbarians land, all of the knights are no longer
handicapped by an early barbarian attack or by rolling
assumed to aid in the defense of Catan. Beginning with the
a lot of “7”s.
player who rolled the dice this turn, one after another each
player will declare how many of their own active knights will be the almanaC
defending Catan. Each player may choose to commit some, none,
The following pages (14-19) contain a list with the names and
or all of their active knights to the defense. This may cause Catan
descriptions of all of the progress cards in Cities & Knights. You
to lose the battle (due to a shortage of knight strength), which
may find it useful to familiarize yourself with all of the cards
would resulting in some players losing a city. Only knights that
before playing. You may then refer to this section as needed
are committed to the defense count toward the strength of the
during play.
knight army, and only committed knights are taken into account
Note: The number after the name of each card is the total
when determining who contributed the weakest force (and will
number of that type of card in the deck.
have a city pillaged).
1133
s c
cience aRds
Alchemist (2) Inventor (2)
This is the only progress card you Switch two number tokens of
can play before you roll the dice. It your choice, but not 2, 12, 6, or 8.
allows you to choose the results of You can improve your
both production dice. Then, roll the production! You may choose any
event die as normal and resolve the two number tokens (except 2, 12 6
event. or 8) and switch their places on the
When you play this card, take the board. You do not have to have a
red and yellow dice and turn
settlement or city next to the hexes
them so the result you want is
with the numbers you are swapping.
face up. You can even make the
If, for example, you choose a “9” dice roll “7.” However, the event
and an “11”, take the “9” token has to be resolved first. Then
players receive their production and put it on the hex where the
as normal. You may not play this “11” token is. Take the “11” token
card after you roll the dice. and put it on the hex where the
Crane (2) “9” token was. You can choose to
exchange a token that is on the hex
You can build a city improvement
occupied by the robber.
(abbey, town hall, etc.) for
1 commodity less than normal. Irrigation (2)
The Crane can only be used to Collect 2 grain cards for each
reduce the cost of building one
fields hex adjacent to at least one of
city improvement (turning over
your settlements or cities.
a page of your flip-chart). If you
You receive 2 grain cards for each build a city, you must pay the
fields hex next to any of your
normal resource costs. You may
settlements and cities. Unlike
use a Crane to reduce the cost
normal production, cities do not
of a first-level improvement (to
increase this bonus.
nothing). You may not combine
2 Crane cards for the same Example: You have two cities
improvement. next to a fields hex. You have
a settlement next to a different
Engineer (1)
field. If you play the Irrigation
You may build one city wall card, you will receive 4 grain
cards.
for free.
Take a city wall and put it under Medicine (2)
one of your cities. A city wall
You may upgrade a settlement to
increases the number of cards
a city for 2 ore and 1 grain. you can safely hold in your hand
when a “7” is rolled, by 2 cards. When you play this card, you save
Each city can only have 1 city 1 ore and 1 grain. You may not
wall, and you cannot have more combine two of these cards for the
than 3 city walls at a time. same city.
1144
HbmG
nataC
0202
©
ENGINEER
You may build
1 city wall for free.
HbmG
nataC
0202
©
ALCHEMIST
Play this card before you
roll the dice. You decide
what the results of both
numbered dice will be. Then roll the event die normally.
Resolve the event die fi rst.
HbmG
nataC
0202
©
CRANE
One city improvement
(abbey, town hall, etc.)
that you build this turn
costs one less commodity
than usual.
HbmG
nataC
0202
©
INVENTOR
You may swap 2 number
tokens of your choice
on the game board. You may not choose any
2, 12, 6, or 8 tokens.
HbmG
nataC
0202
©
IRRIGATION
You may take 2 grain cards
from the bank for each fi elds
hex which is adjacent to
at least one of your
cities or settlements.
HbmG
nataC
0202
©
MEDICINE
For 2 ore and 1 grain,
you may upgrade one of your
settlements into a city.
Mining (2)
Collect 2 ore cards for each
mountains hex adjacent to at least
one of your settlements or cities.
You receive 2 ore cards for each
mountains hex next to any of
your settlements and cities.
Unlike normal production, cities
do not increase this bonus.
Example: You have 2 settlements
next to a mountains hex, and a
city next to a different mountains
hex. If you play the Mining card,
you will receive 4 ore cards.
Printer (1)
This card awards you 1 victory
point.
You must play this card face up
in front of you immediately when
you draw it, even if it is not your
turn. You may not keep VP cards
in your hand. It does not count
toward your hand limit of 4
progress cards, and it may not be
stolen by the Spy.
Road Building (2)
This card allows you to build 2
roads for free.
The roads you build do not have
to be adjacent to each other.
These roads cost you nothing to
build. You must follow all the
normal building rules. If you are
also playing with the Seafarers
expansion, you may build 2
roads, 1 road and 1 ship, or 2
ships when you play this card.
Smith (2)
You may promote 2 of your knights
1 level each for free.
You may not promote “mighty”
knights. You may promote a knight
regardless of whether it is active or
inactive. The condition of the knight
(active or inactive) does not change.
You may only promote a “strong”
knight (level 2) if you have built the
“Fortress” city improvement (politics–
blue). You may only promote a knight
one level per turn.
1155
HbmG
nataC
0202
©
ROAD BUILDING
When you play this card,
you may place 2 roads for free
(if playing with Catan: Seafarers,
you may place 2 ships or
1 ship and 1 road instead).
HbmG
nataC
0202
©
SMITH
You may promote up to
2 of your knights for free
(the normal rules for promoting
knights still apply). Mighty
knights may not be promoted.
HbmG
nataC
0202
©
MINING
You may take 2 ore cards from
the bank for each mountains
hex adjacent to at least one
of your cities or settlements.
HbmG
nataC
0202
©
PRINTER
1 Victory Point!
Reveal this card immediately
when you draw it. This card
cannot be stolen by a spy.
City Development Generates
Progress Card Production
P c
olitics aRds
Bishop (2) knight for free. If your opponent removes a “mighty” knight,
you may place one of your “mighty” knights even if you have
Move the robber, following the
not yet built the “Fortress” city improvement (politics—blue).
normal rules. Draw 1 random
The knight you place has the same status (active or inactive)
resource/commodity card from each
as the knight your opponent removed.
player who has a settlement or city
Diplomat (2)
next to the robber’s new hex.
You may remove an “open”
When you use this card to
move the robber, you can steal 1 road (without another road or
random card from each player other piece at one end). If you
who has a settlement or city remove your own road, you may
next to the hex that you move to, immediately place it somewhere
instead of stealing from only
else on the island (following all the
1 player. If a player has more
normal building rules) for free.
than 1 settlement or city there,
you can still only steal one card An “open” road is a road at the
from that player. beginning or end of a chain of
roads that does not have a knight,
Constitution (1) city, or settlement of the same
This card awards you 1 victory color attached at one end. If you
remove an opponent’s road, it point. You must play this card face
returns to their supply. If you
up in front of you immediately
remove your own road, then you
when you draw it, even if it is not
may place it immediately on the
your turn.
board, free of charge (following
You may not keep Victory Point the normal building rules—
in your hand. It does not count connected to your own road or
toward your hand limit of settlement/city). You may remove
4 progress cards, and it may not your own road and choose not to
be stolen by the Spy. replace it.
Deserter (2) Intrigue (2)
Choose 1 opponent. They must You may displace an opponent’s
remove 1 knight of their choice knight. The knight must be on an
from the board. You may then place intersection connected to at least
1 of your own knights, on the board. one of your roads or shipping
Its strength must equal to the routes.
knight removed (the normal rules With this card you can displace
for placing knights apply). an opponent’s knight without
When you play this card, your using a knight of your own. You
opponent chooses which of their can play this card even if you
own knights to remove from the have no knights of your own. The
board. If they choose a knight that displaced knight must be moved
you do not have available (for to an empty space. If the knight
example, a “strong” knight and cannot be displaced, then remove
both of your “strong” knights are it from the board (return it to
already on the board), you may its owner). After the knight is
place a basic knight instead. If displaced), you may place a basic
you cannot place any knights, knight instead, following the
your opponent must still remove normal rules.
one of their own knights. You just
lose the opportunity to place a
1166
HbmG nataC
0202
©
DESERTER
Choose 1 opponent.
They must remove 1 knight
of their choice from the board.
You may place 1 of your own
knights on the board (its strength must be equal to
the knight removed).
HbmG
nataC
0202
©
BISHOP
Move the robber. You may
draw 1 random card (resource
or commodity) from the hand
of each player who has a settlement or city adjacent
to the robber’s new hex.
HbmG
nataC
0202
©
CONSTITUTION
1 Victory Point!
Reveal this card immediately
when you draw it. This card
cannot be stolen by a spy.
HbmG
nataC
0202
©
DIPLOMAT
You may remove any open road (a road with nothing attached at
one end). If you remove one of
your own roads, you may place
it in another location.
HbmG nataC
0202
©
INTRIGUE
You may displace one of your opponent’s knights, without using
a knight of your own. The knight
must be on an intersection
connected to one of your roads or lines of ships.
Saboteur (2)
When you play this card, each
player who has as many or more
Commercial Harbor (2)
victory points than you must
You may force each of the other
discard half (round down) of their
players to make a special trade.
cards to the bank (resource and/or
You may offer each opponent any 1
commodity cards).
resource card from your hand. They
Your agents spread chaos in your
must exchange it for any
opponents’ cities! Each of the
1 commodity card of their choice
other players who has at least as
from their hand, if they have any.
many victory points as you must
discard half of their resource/ You may use this ability at any
commodity cards. Each player time during the turn you play
chooses which of their own cards the card. However, you may
to discard. only force each player to make
this trade with you once that
Spy (3)
turn. Opponent choose which
Look at another player’s hand commodity card to give you if
of progress cards. You may choose they have more than 1. If you
offer a resource to a player who
1 card to take and add to
has no commodity cards, take
your hand.
your resource card back and the
You may even steal another Spy trade is void.
and play it immediately or save
it for later. Victory point cards Master Merchant (2)
cannot be stolen. Choose another player who
has more victory points than you
Warlord (2)
do. Look at the player’s hand of
You may activate all of your
resource and commodity cards and
knights for free.
choose 2 cards to take and add to
When you play this card, you can your hand.
activate your knights without
You can only play this card on an
paying any grain. Remember
opponent who has more victory
that a knight may not perform
points than you. There is no
any actions during the turn
defense against this “trade.”
after it is activated, but you can
activate it after it has performed Merchant (6)
an action that turn.
Place the Merchant on any land
Wedding (2) hex next to 1 of your settlements
or cities. You may exchange the
Each of your opponents who has
resources produced by this type of
more victory points than you must
hex with the supply at a 2:1 rate, as
give you 2 resource/commodity
long as the merchant remains on
cards of their choice.
that hex.
If any of these players only have
When you play this card, take the
1 card in hand, that player must
merchant and put it on any land
give you that card. If any of these
hex next to one or more of your
players have no cards, then that
settlements or cities. As long as the
player gives you nothing. Players
merchant remains here (under
whose victory points are equal
your control), you may trade the
to or lower than yours, are not
type of resource produced by this
affected by this card.
1177
HbmG
nataC
0202
©
WARLORD
You may activate all of
your knights for free.
HbmG
nataC
0202
©
WEDDING
Each player who has more
victory points than you must
give you 2 cards of their choice
(resource and/or commodity).
HbmG
nataC
0202
©
SABOTEUR
Each player who has as many
or more victory points than you
must discard half of their
own cards to the bank
(resource and/or commodity).
HbmG
nataC
0202
©
SPY
Examine an opponent’s hand
of progress cards. You may take 1 card of your choice and
add it to your hand. HbmG
nataC
0202
©
COMMERCIAL HARBOR
You may offer each opponent
1 resource card from your hand.
In exchange, each player must give you 1 commodity card of
their choice. If they have none,
your resource card is returned.
HbmG
nataC
0202
©
MASTER MERCHANT
Select an opponent who has
more victory points than you.
You may examine their hand of
resource and commodity cards
and select any 2 cards, which
you may add to your hand.
HbmG
nataC
0202
©
t
Rade
c
aRds
MERCHANT
Place the merchant on a
land hex next to your settlement
or city. While the merchant
remains here, you may trade
the resource produced by this
terrain at a 2:1 ratio.
hex with the supply at a 2:1 rate (as is the case with a special Credits
harbor). As usual, you may also exchange these resources for
Design: Klaus Teuber (www.klausteuber.com)
commodities. If another player plays a merchant card, that
player takes control of the merchant and receives the trade Original Development: TM-Spiele GmbH
advantage and the victory point. If you want to move the 5th Ed. Development Team: Pete Fenlon, Arnd Fischer,
merchant to a different hex, you will have to play another
Ron Magin, Benjamin Teuber, and Guido Teuber
merchant card. The robber does not affect the merchant.
Art: Michael Menzel, Harald Lieske, Stephen Graham Walsh
You also receive 1 victory point for as long as you control the
merchant. Art Direction & Graphic Design: Pete Fenlon,
Michaela Kienle, and Ron Magin
Production: Ron Magin & Pete Fenlon
Special Thanks: Robert T. Carty, Jr., Coleman Charlton,
Morgan Dontanville, Chris Funk, Alex Colón Hernández,
Stephanie Newman, Antonio Pigafetta (LSKC/39-444), Donna
Prior, and Kelli Schmitz.
Original Game Development: William Niebling, Guido Teuber, Coleman
Charlton, Robert T. Carty Jr., Will Niebling, William Niebling, Alex Yeager, Larry
Roznai, Nick Johnson, and Pete Fenlon.
With Thanks To: Arnd Beenen, Peter Bromley, Darwin Bromley, Ariel Butler,
Keywood Cheeves, Emily Johnson, Nick Johnson, Olivia Johnston, Wolfgang Lüdtke,
Luc Mertens, Mike Szul, Reiner Müller, Schar Niebling, David Platnick, Lou Rexing,
Karl Roelofs, Alan Roireau, Bridget Roznai, Loren Roznai, Benny Teuber, Claudia
Teuber, Liam Teuber, Leif Teuber, Tom Smith, Mike Strack, Karl Roelofs, H. Jean
Vanaise, Trella Wilhite, Bill Wordelmann, Elaine Wordelmann.
Copyright © 2020 Catan GmbH and Catan Studio. Catan,
Catan–Cities & Knights, The Settlers of Catan, the “Catan Sun”
logo, the “Glowing Yellow Sun” and “Catan Board” marks, and
all marks herein are trademarks of Catan GmbH and are used
under license by Catan Studio. Published by Catan Studio,
1995 W. County Rd. B2, Roseville, MN 55113.
Phone +1.651.639.1905.
Gamegenic and the Gamegenic logo are TM & © Gamegenic
GmbH, Germany. All rights reserved.
You have purchased a game of the highest quality.
However, if you find any components missing
or damaged, please visit:
www.catanstudio.com/parts
For all other inquiries, contact us at:
info@catanstudio.com
1188
HbmG
nataC
0202
©
TRADE MONOPOLY
Name a commodity
(cloth, coin, or paper).
Each opponent must
give you 1 card of that
type (if they have any).
HbmG
nataC
0202
©
MERCHANT FLEET
For the rest of your turn, you
may trade one resource or
commodity of your choice with
the bank at a 2:1 rate.
You may make as many
trades as you wish.
HbmG
nataC
0202
©
Merchant Fleet (2)
You may use one resource or
commodity of your choice to make
any number of 2:1 trades with the
supply during the turn that you play
this card.
For the rest of the turn, you may
trade one resource or commodity
of your choice at a 2:1 rate.
You can make as many such
trades as you wish. As usual, you
may exchange commodities for
resources and vice versa.
Resource Monopoly (4)
RESOURCE MONOPOLY
Name a resource. Each player
must give you 2 of that type of
resource if they have them.
You may name any of the
5 resources (ore, grain, wool,
Name a resource
(brick, grain, ore, lumber, or wool). lumber, or brick). Each player
Each opponent must give you
that has the named resource must
2 cards of that type
(if they have any). give you 2. Any player that has
only has 1 of that resource, must
give you that 1 card.
Trade Monopoly (2)
Name a commodity. Each player
must give you 1 commodity of that
type if they have them.
You may name any of the
3 commodities (coin, paper,
or cloth). Each player that has
the named commodity must give
you 1.
Studio
™
catanstudio.com catan.com
a i If you would like to protect your cards in this game, we
lmanaC ndex
recommend Gamegenic card sleeves.
Entries Page
The badge below indicates what style of sleeves and the
Game Rules . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .2 number of packs required to sleeve all of the cards in this CATAN
Game Components. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .2 expansion.
What You Need From Your Catan Game . . . . . . . . . . . .2
New Game Pieces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .3
Knights . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
Development Flip-chart. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .3
City Walls . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .3
Setting Up the Island of Catan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .3
Tiles and the Barbarian Tile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .3
Setting Up the Game. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .4
Set-Up Phase. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .4
Turn Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
Specific Actions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
Dice Rolls . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .5
Trading and Building . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .6
City Walls . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .6
Knights . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .6
Playing Progress Cards . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .6
Commodities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .7
City Improvements. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .7
The Metropolis. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .8
Progress Cards . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .9
Acquiring Progress Cards . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .9
Playing Progress Cards . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .9
Knights. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .9
Moving a Knight. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
Displacing a Knight. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
Chasing Away the Robber. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
Attack of the Barbarians! . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
Determine the Barbarian Strength . . . . . . . . . . . . .11
Determine the Strength of Catan’s Knights . . . . . . . . 11
Compare Attackers’ and Defenders’ Strengths . . . . . . .11
Barbarians Return Home . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .11
Losing Your Last City . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
The Merchant . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
Ending the Game . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
Variants and Optional Rules . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
Catan: Seafarers Variant . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .13
Nasty Variant for Experienced Players . . . . . . . . . . .13
Knight-Errant Variant. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
Easy Start Variant . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .13
Almanac . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
Science Cards . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .14
Politics Cards . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
Trade Cards . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .17
1199
settinG up the Game
• Construct the frame around the board. turn sequenCe
• Construct the board as shown, according to the scenario or using random set-up.
• Roll all 3 dice.
• Place number markers on the board.
• Resolve the results of the white event die.
• Sort the new commodity cards according to type into 3 face-up stacks.
• Depending on the white event die and
• Divide the progress cards according to type (by flag color) into 3 face-down stacks.
the red die, players may draw progress
• Place the 3 metropolises, the merchant cone, the 3 dice (1 yellow, 1 red, and 1 event die),
cards.
and the “Longest Road” card near the island.
• All players produce the resources
• Place the black wooden ship on the “barbarian ship” space on the barbarian tile. On its
indicated by the red and yellow dice.
way to Catan, the barbarian ship will move along the depicted track.
• All players produce the commodities
• Place the robber on the desert hex.
indicated by the red and yellow dice.
• First, starting with the first player and continuing clockwise, each player places
• You do any or all of the following in any
1 settlement and 1 road (as in Catan).
order:
• Second, starting with the last player who placed a
Starting Set-up – Trade resources and/or commodities
settlement and continuing counterclockwise, each
with bank and/or other players.
for Beginners
player places 1 city and 1 road. (The first player to
– Build roads, settlements, cities,
place a settlement will be the last to place a city).
Beginners should set up knights, city walls, and/or city
No city may be placed fewer than 2 hex edges away
the game according to improvements.
from any city or settlement.
the example shown here. – Activate, promote, and/or perform
• Each player receives their first
actions with knights.
resources when they place their city—
– Play any number of progress cards.
receiving 1 resource for each
terrain adjacent to their city.
• Players place their
development flip-charts
in front of themselves
with the first page 66 22 55
•••••••••• •• ••••••••
showing
(indicating no city
improvements).
33 99 1100
•••• •••••••• ••••••
88 44 1111 33 88
•••••••••• •••••• •••• •••• ••••••••••
1100 55 66 44
•••••• •••••••• •••••••••• ••••••
City Production
Terrain Resources Commodities 99 1122 1111
•••••••• •• ••••
Forest 1 Wood 1 Paper
Pasture 1 Wool 1 Cloth Studio
Fields 2 Grain None ™
Hills 2 Brick None
Mountains 1 Ore 1 Coin
2200
